The Project Gutenberg eBook of The highland bagpipe, by W. L.  Manson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The highland bagpipe
       its history, literature, and music, with some account of the
       traditions, superstitions, and anecdotes relating to the
       instrument and its tunes

Author: W. L.  Manson

Release Date: February 8, 2023 [eBook #69986]

Language: English

Produced by: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
             images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HIGHLAND BAGPIPE ***





                          The Highland Bagpipe


[Illustration:

  “THE CORONACH”

  (_From the Painting by R. R. Mac Ian_)
]




                          The Highland Bagpipe
                   Its History, Literature, and Music
                        WITH SOME ACCOUNT OF THE
                Traditions, Superstitions, and Anecdotes
                              Relating to
                      The Instrument and Its Tunes


                                    BY

                               W. L. MANSON


 _The tune with the river in it, the fast river and the courageous, that
 kens not stop nor tarry, that runs round rock and over fall with a good
   humour, yet no mood for anything but the way before it._—NEIL MUNRO.


                            ALEXANDER GARDNER

               Publisher to Her late Majesty Queen Victoria

                PAISLEY; AND 26 PATERNOSTER SQUARE, LONDON

                                   1901




                                   TO

                            A. DEWAR WILLOCK

                             EDITOR OF THE

                        _Glasgow Weekly Herald_

                   WHO JUDICIOUSLY BLUE-PENCILLED THE
                   FIRST ISSUE OF THESE ARTICLES AND
                   ENCOURAGED THE WRITER TO GIVE THEM
                       TO THE PUBLIC IN THIS MORE
                             PERMANENT FORM




                                Preface.


This book was not written on a preconceived plan, drawn up from the
beginning of the work. It “growed.” It had its inception in a commission
to write for the _Weekly Herald_ half-a-dozen biographical articles on
famous pipers. The necessary investigation produced a mass of material
too interesting to be left unused, and the half-dozen articles of the
original commission became twenty-seven, with very little of the
biographical in them. These, after being finally recast, revised, and in
several cases re-written, are now in the form of a book flung at an
unoffending public. If the volume interests any one—well. If not—well.
There is nothing more to be said on that point.

It were vain to attempt to acknowledge indebtedness to books or to men.
Every available book bearing on the subject even in the most indirect
way has been consulted, in many cases read. A great deal of the material
used is of course common to all Highland literature, and one book cannot
be quoted more than another. With men it is equally impracticable to
give names. So many have helped, so many have written giving additional
bits of information or suggesting improvements, so many have, in reply
to requests, kindly supplied matter dealing with phases of the subject
on which they have intimate knowledge, that one could not do justice to
all without naming all. Still, while this may not be done, I cannot
possibly refrain from saying that without the assistance given by Mr.
Henry Whyte (“Fionn”) in matters of Highland history and questions
connected with the Gaelic language, the book could hardly have been
published; while Mr. John Mac Kay, editor of the _Celtic Monthly_, in
throwing open to me his valuable library of Celtic literature, did very
much to lighten my labours. This, I think, is all I can safely say. If I
said more, I would have to say so very much.

                                                                W. L. M.

  GLASGOW, _April 27, 1901_.




                               Contents.


                                                                    PAGE

 CHAPTER I.—TUNING UP,                                                 9


 “A Hundred Pipers”—Scotland becoming Cosmopolitan—The War spirit of the
   Pipes—Regiments, not Clans—Annual Gatherings—Adaptability of Pipes—
   Scots folk from Home—An aged Enthusiast—Highlands an Extraordinary
   Study—Succession of Chiefs—Saxon introduced—Gaelic printed—Highlands
   in 1603—The Mac Neills of Barra—Highland hospitality.


 CHAPTER II.—HARPERS, BARDS, AND PIPERS,                              18


 Ancient musical instruments—Priestly harpers—Hereditary harpers—Irish
   _versus_ Scottish harpers—Royal harpers—Use of harp universal—Welsh
   sarcasm—Mary Queen of Scots’ harp—The last of the harpers—“The Harper
   of Mull”—From harp to pipes—The _clarsach_—Pipes supplanting bards—
   The last clan bard—Bardic customs—Bards’ jealousy of pipes—The bard
   in battle—Duncan Ban Mac Intyre—Two pipers scared—When the pipes
   became paramount—The fiery cross—The coronach.


 CHAPTER III.—THE TALE OF THE YEARS,                                  30


 The time of the Flood—Pipes in Scripture—In Persia—In Arabia—In Tarsus—
   Tradition of the Nativity—In Rome—In Greece—In Wales, Ireland, and
   Scotland—Melrose Abbey—In France—In England—At Bannockburn—Chaucer—In
   war—First authentic Scottish reference—Oldest authentic specimen—
   Became general—Rosslyn Chapel—Second drone added—At Flodden—“A maske
   of bagpypes”—Spenser—Shakespeare—James VI.—A poetical historian—Big
   drone added—The ’45—Native to Scotland—The evolution of the
   Highlands.


 CHAPTER IV.—THE MAKE OF THE PIPES,                                   59


 The “Encyclopædia” definition—The simple reed—Early forms—Simple
   bagpipes—The chorus—The _volynka_—Continental pipes—British pipes—The
   Northumbrian—The Irish—The Highland—Tuning—Modern pipes—Prize pipes.


 CHAPTER V.—WITH AN EAR TO THE DRONE,                                 73


 Dr. Johnson—Inspiration of Scottish music—Professor Blackie—Highland
   music simple—Scottish airs once Highland—Age of Highland music—
   Capability of the bagpipe—How it has suffered—Peculiarities of the
   pibroch—Pipe music not fitted for inside—How it troubled the
   pressman—Chevalier Neukomm—Professor Blackie again—A Chicago jury’s
   opinion—An ode to the pipes.


 CHAPTER VI.—THE “LANGUAGE” OF THE PIPES,                             87


 Have the pipes a language?—A wild, fanciful notion—How it got a hold—
   How much of it is true?—The reed actually speaking—A powerful
   influence—The power of association—Neil Munro—Descriptive Highland
   airs—_A Cholla mo run_—Military stories—In South Africa—An
   enthusiastic war correspondent.


 CHAPTER VII.—THE LITERATURE OF THE PIPES,                            98


 Ancient music lost—Transmission by tradition—Druidical remains—Systems
   of teaching—No books—“Unintelligible jargon”—_Canntaireachd_—The Mac
   Crimmon System—The Gesto Book—A scientific system—A tune in
   _Canntaireachd_—Pipers unable to explain—Earliest printed pipe music—
   Mac Donald’s Books—More recent books—Something to be done.


 CHAPTER VIII.—THE PIPES IN BATTLE,                                  113


 A Culloden incident—Ancient Celts in battle—The harper and bard
   superseded—First mention of pipes in battle—First regimental pipers—
   In the navy—Prince Charlie’s pipers—An “instrument of war”—A Mac
   Crimmon incident—Power of pipes in battle—A Magersfontein incident—
   Byron’s tribute—Position in actual battle.


 CHAPTER IX.—THE PIPER AS A HERO,                                    126


 One cowardly piper—At Philiphaugh—At Bothwell Bridge—At Cromdale—The
   Peninsular War—At Waterloo—At Dargai—Reay Country pipers—At Candahar—
   At Lucknow—In America—In Ashanti—In the Soudan—In South Africa.


 CHAPTER X.—THE REGIMENTAL PIPER,                                    136


 Preserving the pipes—Regimental bands—Pay of army pipers—The seven
   pipers of Falkirk—Duties of regimental pipers—The meaning of
   “Retreat”—A story of Napoleon—In a social capacity—An army wedding—A
   military funeral—At the officers’ mess—Awkward incidents—
   “Boberechims.”


 CHAPTER XI.—THE PIPER AS A MAN OF PEACE,                            146


 Clan pipers—Chief’s retinue—At weddings—Pipers prohibited—In sorrow—At
   funerals—Queen Victoria’s funeral—To lighten labour—The harvest
   dance—The shepherd’s pipe—In church architecture—In church services—
   As a call to church—Ministers and the pipes—Falling into disrepute—
   “As proud as a piper”—Jealousy of the old masters—“As fou as a
   piper”—An Irish piper.


 CHAPTER XII.—THE BURGH PIPERS OF SCOTLAND,                          168


 Royal pipers—In France—At the English court—The Edinburgh Piper—
   Dumbarton—Biggar—Wigtown—Glenluce—Dumfries—Linlithgow—Aberdeen—Perth—
   Keith—Dalkeith—Dundee—Peebles—A weird story—Falkirk—“Gallowshiels”
   pipers’ combat—The Hasties of Jedburgh—Habbie Simson of Kilbarchan—
   Bridgeton—Neil Blane of Lanark—The Piper of Northumberland.


 CHAPTER XIII.—FROM THE SEAT OF THE SCORNER,                         192


 Poking fun at the pipes—English caricature—Mixed metaphor—Churchism and
   pipes—Fifteenth century satire—A biographical sneer—Thackeray—Bitter
   English writers—Testimony of a Jew—Home sarcasm—The bards—Joanna
   Baillie—A Frenchman’s opinion—William Black—Ignorance breaking its
   shins—Imported sportsmen—The duty of Highlanders.


 CHAPTER XIV.—THE HUMOUR OF THE PIPES,                               205


 _Punch’s_ joke—King Charles’s heads—An amusing competition—A
   Highlander’s Irishism—Wedding experiences—A piper’s fall—A
   resourceful piper—A Cameron piper and his officer—Lochaber no more—An
   elephant’s objection—Embarked in a tub—Glasgow street scene—Bad
   player’s strategy—What the wind did—A new kind of tripe—A Pasha and a
   piper—A Gordon nervous—A jealous piper—Dougal Mac Dougal’s downfall.


 CHAPTER XV.—DEMONIAC PIPES AND PIPERS,                              223


 Tam o’ Shanter—The Devil’s favourite instrument—“Sorcerers” burned—A
   bard’s satire—Glasgow Cathedral story—A Hebridean Tam o’ Shanter—
   Continental ideas—Reformation zeal—Ghostly pipers—A “changeling”
   piper—_The Lost Pibroch_—The Chisholm “enchanted” pipes—The Black
   Chanter of Clan Chattan.


 CHAPTER XVI.—PIPERS AND FAIRIES,                                    233


 In fairies’ hillocks—Stories with a common origin—Sutherlandshire
   version—Away for a year—Harris piper and the fairies—Seven years
   away—Fairies helping pipers—Helping the Mac Crimmons—A boy piper—How
   the music went from Islay to Skye—Faust-like bargains—A Caithness
   story—A fairy piper.


 CHAPTER XVII.—PIPERS IN ENCHANTED CAVES,                            247


 Allied to fairy stories—Venturesome pipers—The Skye cave—The Mull
   version—The Argyllshire—The Ghostly piper of Dunderave—“Wandering
   Willie’s Tale”—A Sutherlandshire cave—A Caithness cave—Underground
   passages.


 CHAPTER XVIII.—THE HEREDITARY PIPERS,                               257


 Hereditary in two senses—When they ceased—The Mac Crimmons—A
   traditional genealogy—A Mac Gregor tradition—The Mac Crimmon College—
   Dr. Johnson—College broken up—An Irish college—Its system—A Mac
   Crimmon’s escapades—Respect for the Mac Crimmons—The Rout of Moy—The
   last of the race—How they excelled—The Mac Arthurs—The Mac Intyres—
   The Mac Kays—The Rankins—The Campbells—The Mac Gregors.


 CHAPTER XIX.—SOME LATTER DAY PIPERS,                                276


 Angus Mac Kay—Queen Victoria’s first piper—His book—Donald Mac Kay—John
   Bane Mac Kenzie—The Queen’s offer—The piper’s reply—Donald Cameron—
   His achievements—His theory of pipe music—His system of noting—His
   last competition—A special reed—“The King of Pipers”—Other latter day
   pipers.


 CHAPTER XX.—HOW PIPING IS PRESERVED,                                287


 The waking—Professor Blackie—Highland Society of Scotland—Highland
   Society of London—The system of competitions—The first competition—
   The venue changed—The gold medal—Present day competitions—Some
   suggestions—R.L.S.—Pipe bands—Examples from high life—Quality of
   music—The pipes abroad—Sir Walter Scott.


 CHAPTER XXI.—THE OLDEST PIPE TUNES,                                 299


 Unreliability of tradition—Lost in antiquity—Occasions of tunes—
   Interest of stories—The Mac Raes’ March—Story of “Suarachan”—Hal o’
   the Wynd—The Mac Intosh’s Lament—Two different stories—_A Cholla mo
   run_—Duntroon’s Salute—The Campbells are coming.


 CHAPTER XXII.—SOME WORLD-FAMOUS PIBROCHS,                           314


 Mac Crimmon’s Lament—Best known of all pipe tunes—Its story—Blackie’s
   poetry—Scott’s—The war tune of Glengarry—A tragic story—The Pibroch
   o’ Donuil Dhu—Too long in this Condition—Pipers and inhospitality—Oh,
   that I had three hands—Lochaber no More—Allan Ramsay’s verses—An
   elated Mac Crimmon—Rory _Mòr’s_ Lament—Clan Farlane Pibroch—Pipers,
   poetry, and superstition.


 CHAPTER XXIII.—SOME WELL-KNOWN GATHERINGS,                          335


 A Tune with four stories—The Carles wi’ the Breeks—The Mac Gregor’s
   Gathering—Scott’s verses—_Caber Feidh_—The Camerons’ Gathering—Well-
   matched chiefs—The Loch of the Sword.


 CHAPTER XXIV.—MORE STORIES AND A MORAL,                             346


 The Clan Stewart March—Mac Gregor of Ruaro—The Braes of the Mist—
   Episode at a Dunvegan competition—A Mac Crimmon surpassed—Mac
   Pherson’s Lament—Burns and the story—Rob Roy’s Lament—The Mac
   Lachlans’ March—_Gille Calum_—The Reel o’ Tulloch—The Periwig Reel—
   Jenny Dang the Weaver—Mac Donald’s Salute—Mac Leod’s Salute—
   Disappearing lore—What might be done.



                                APPENDIX.


 THE SCALE OF THE PIPES,                                             369


 PRACTICAL HINTS,                                                    375


 BIBLIOGRAPHY OF PIPE MUSIC,                                         383


 GOLD MEDALLISTS OF HIGHLAND SOCIETY OF LONDON,                      388


 DIRECTORY OF BAGPIPE MAKERS,                                        392


 THE LARGEST KNOWN LIST OF PIBROCHS,                                 393


 THE GARB OF OLD GAUL,                                               400



 INDEX,                                                              411




                             Illustrations.


                                                                    PAGE
 FROM ST. MARTIN’S CROSS, IONA,                              _On Cover_.
 “THE CORONACH,”                                         _Frontispiece_.
 HARPER: ON A STONE AT MONIFEITH,                                     19
 CONTORNIATE OF NERO’S TIME,                                          33
 CARVINGS IN MELROSE ABBEY,                                           37
 THE OLDEST EXISTING PIPES,                                           43
 CARVINGS IN ROSSLYN CHAPEL,                                          45
 GERMAN PIPER OF THE 16TH CENTURY,                                    47
 OLD GERMAN WIND INSTRUMENTS,                                         61
 THE NORTHUMBRIAN BAGPIPE,                                            65
 THE IRISH BAGPIPE,                                                   67
 THE GREAT HIGHLAND BAGPIPE,                                          69
 CAPT. NEIL MAC LEOD OF GESTO,                                       103
 DANCING TO PIPE MUSIC,                                              149
 A HIGHLAND FAMILY PARTY,                                            151
 LOWLAND, HIGHLAND, AND IRISH PIPERS,                                169
 “THE SPIRIT OF THE PIPES,”                                          193
 A PICTURE FROM _PUNCH_,                                             204
 “THE DANCE OF DEATH,”                                               225
 THE CAVE OF GOLD,                                         _to face_ 247
 A MAC CRIMMON PIPER,                                                259
 A MAC ARTHUR PIPER,                                       _to face_ 269
 ANGUS MAC KAY,                                                 „    276
 JOHN BANE MAC KENZIE,                                          „    278
 DONALD CAMERON,                                                „    280
 SUTHERLAND VOLUNTEER BAND,                                     „    287
 GOVAN POLICE BAND,                                             „    294




                         The Highland Bagpipe.




                               CHAPTER I.
                               TUNING UP.

             “I have power, high power for freedom,
               To wake the burning soul;
             I have sonnets that through the ancient hills,
               Like a torrent’s voice might roll;
             I have pealing notes of victory,
               That might welcome kings from war;
             I have rich deep tones to send the wail,
               For a hero’s death afar.”

  “A Hundred Pipers”—Scotland becoming Cosmopolitan—The War spirit of
    the Pipes—Regiments, not Clans—Annual Gatherings—Adaptability of
    Pipes—Scotch folk from Home—An aged Enthusiast—Highlands an
    Extraordinary Study—Succession of Chiefs—Saxon introduced—Gaelic
    printed—Highlands in 1603—The Mac Neills of Barra—Highland
    hospitality.


“Wi’ a Hundred Pipers an’ a’ an’ a’” is a song that catches on with
Highland people as well now as in the days when the piper was a power in
the land. There is a never ending charm about the pipes, and there is a
never ending swing about the song of the hundred pipers, that stirs the
blood of the true-born Celt, and makes him applaud vigorously in rhythm
with the swing of the chorus. But it is because the song harks back to
the time when one good piper was a man to be revered, and a hundred in
one place a gathering to be dreaded—if they were all there of one
accord—that it continues to hold its own. It expresses something of the
grandeur that was attached to the national music, when the clan piper
was second only to the chief in importance, and the pibroch as much a
part of the clan life as the fiery cross, so it is accepted as the one
outstanding bit of song that helps to keep alive the traditional glory
of the Great Highland Bagpipe. Not that there is any immediate danger of
that glory fading. It is but changing in character. Scotland has become
cosmopolitan, and the fastnesses of the Highlands are no longer the
retreats of wild cateran clans, whose peculiar habits and primitive
ideas of social life helped to bind them together with ties of family
strength, and at the same time to keep them unspotted from the Lowland
and outside world that knew not the Gaelic and the tartan and the pipes.
The _Piob Mohr_ is not now an agency to be reckoned with by any one who
wishes to explore the hills and glens, neither are there any little wars
in Lorn or elsewhere, in which it can have an opportunity of leading Mac
against Mac, or clan against clan. As a Highland war spirit, its glory
has departed, and he would be a bold man who would say he was sorry for
it. True, the Highland regiments who fight Britain’s battles abroad
still wear the tartan and march to the same old strains, but they are
not now Highland clans. They are British battalions, whose empire,
instead of being bounded by the horizon of a Scottish glen, is
worldwide, and they march and wheel, and charge the enemy and storm the
heights in strict accordance with the orders of a general who has his
orders from Westminster. The only gathering of the clans we have
nowadays are the gatherings in the halls of our big cities, where a
thousand or two of people bearing a common name meet under the
presidency of the next-of-kin of the chief of olden times, and drink,
not mountain dew, but tea, and have Highland or Jacobite songs sung to
them by people whose profession is singing, and applaud dancers and
pipers who dance and pipe because it pays them to do so. This is very
far removed from the time when the _Piob Mohr_ was in the zenith of its
power, though when one gets enthused with the atmosphere of such a
meeting, and forgets the slushy streets outside, and the telegraph and
the railway, and other nineteenth century things that have made the
Highlands impossible, the song of the hundred pipers is quite sufficient
to make the blood course quicker, and to translate one for a moment to
other scenes and other times. But it is only for a moment. The prosaic
present comes back with a reality that will not be denied, and one
remembers with a sigh that the song is but a sentiment, and that never
more will the gathering cries of the clans re-echo through the glens,
the fiery cross pass from hand to hand, or the peal of the pibroch ring
from clachan to clachan in a wild cry to arms.

As an inspiration to the clansmen the bagpipe is no more, but it remains
an integral part of Scottish life and character. It is one of the
peculiarities of the instrument that it adapts itself to circumstances.
When that phase of life in which it was born and brought up, as it were,
passed away, it quietly but firmly declined to be moved into the
background. There is something of the stubbornness of the old reivers
about it, and just as the Highlander in his times of greatest adversity
stuck to his pipes, so the pipes seem determined to stick to the
Highlanders in spite of the tendencies of latter-day civilisation. The
love of the Highlander for his pipes is too deep-rooted to vanish simply
because circumstances change. When Rob Roy lay a-dying, and when an old
enemy came to see him, he had himself decked out in his plaid and
claymore, and when the interview was over, “Now,” said he, “let the
piper play _Cha til ma tulidh_,” and he died before the dirge was
finished. That spirit has lived through the many changes that have taken
place since Rob Roy’s day, and it lives in a modified form now. Nothing
will make a Scottish audience, especially a Scottish audience far from
home, cheer as the pipes will, and no sound is so welcome at an open-air
gathering, or to the wandered Scotchman, as the wild notes of the
national instrument. In the preface to one collection of Highland music
we are told of a well-known Edinburgh man, discreetly referred to as “W—
— B——, Esq.,” who was at the time the most exquisite violinist in
Scotland. Even at the venerable age of eighty-three, whenever he heard
the sound of the pipes he hastened to the place, and after giving the
itinerant player a handsome reward, he withdrew to a passage or common
stair near by and had what he called “a wee bit dance to himsel’.” This
does not seem a very wonderful proceeding, though the story applies to
about forty years ago, for even now many a Highlander if he is in
anything like a private place, will begin to “Hooch” and dance if he
should happen to hear the pipes. He would never think of dancing to any
other music—other music is foolishness unto him. Many things may and
will change, but it is hardly possible to imagine circumstances which
could dislodge pipe music from its honoured place as the national music
of Scotland.

The preservation of the Gaelic, the kilt, and the pipes is the most
notable feature in Highland history. Without his tartan, his language,
and his music, the Gael would be only “A naked Pict, meagre and pale,
the ghost of what he was.” But he has kept these, his distinguishing
characteristics, and the Scottish Highlands of to-day is one of the most
extraordinary studies in Europe, retaining as it does a language the
most ancient, and the customs and music which distinguished it in ages
the most remote, in spite of circumstances which might have proved too
much for any social system whatever. The nature of the country did much
to perpetuate these things. It was hilly, and, in the old days,
inaccessible; the wants of the people were supplied among themselves,
their manners were simple and patriarchal, and they had little
intercourse with strangers except through trading in cattle and an
occasional foray into the low country. So a spirit of independence and
jealous pride of ancestry was cultivated, and in tradition, song, and
music, the exploits of their forbears were celebrated. All this went to
make Celtic Scotland a nation by itself, and its people a peculiar
people. There is nothing in the political history of any country so
remarkable as the succession of the Highland chiefs and the long and
uninterrupted sway they held over their followers.

Somewhere about 1066 Malcolm Canmore removed his court from Iona to
Dunfermline and introduced the Saxon language, and about 1270 Gaelic was
entirely superseded in the Lowlands. Latin was used in all publications,
and there were not many who could read what few books there were. Gaelic
was not printed till 1567, centuries after it had ceased to be the
language of the court or of “society.” Then a book of John Knox’s was
issued in Gaelic, but it was 1767 before the New Testament appeared in
the Celtic tongue. When it did ten thousand copies were sold. There was,
of course, a vast store of poetry and literature floating around in the
minds of the people, passed down from generation to generation; but,
with the exception of two small collections, one by Rev. John
Farquharson of Strathglass in 1571, and the other by Alexander Mac
Donald, Ardnamurchan, about eight years later, it had all to wait until
1759, when James Mac Pherson, the collector of Ossianic poetry, compiled
or wrote (whether he compiled or wrote it is too delicate a matter to
express a definite opinion about in this place) the classics of the
Highlands. In spite of all these disadvantages, perhaps by reason of
them, the Highlands remained the Highlands until the beginning of the
present century. The many years of tribal warfare and of warfare with
other peoples, did not destroy the individuality of the race, it was the
slow civilising process of later ages that made the Highlands less a
distinct nation than a province of the big British Empire.

Of the circumstances in the midst of which the pipes and pipe music
first got a hold on the affections of the Highland people we know but
little. There were harpers before there were pipers, and probably bards
before there were harpers, but these did not record contemporary history
or the traditions of their age with any degree of fulness or accuracy,
if indeed they can be said to have recorded anything at all who only
told the next generation what they had heard from the previous. Writing
in 1603 a traveller says of the Highlanders:—

  “They delight much in musicke, but chiefly in harps and clairschoes of
  their own fashion. The strings of the clairschoes are made of brass
  wire, and the strings of the harps of sinews, which strings they
  strike either with their nayles growing long, or else with an
  instrument appoynted for that use. They take great pleasure to deck
  their harps and clairschoes with silver and precious stones; the poore
  ones that cannot attayne hereunto decke them with christall. They sing
  verses prettily compound, containing (for the most part) prayses of
  valiant men. There is not almost any other argument whereof their
  rymes intreat. They speak the ancient French language, altered a
  little.”

As to the country itself, it was a mysterious, unknown land to all but
the native. Ancient historians puzzled over its mystery, but could not
fathom it. So they wrote under the shadow of the mysterious. Procopius,
a Greek writer who flourished about A.D. 530, and wrote of the Roman
Empire, speaking about the Highlands, says:—

  “In the west, beyond the wall (Antoninus’ Wall), the air is infectious
  and mortal, the ground is covered with serpents, and this dreary
  solitude is the region of departed spirits, who are translated from
  the opposite shores in substantial boats, and by living rowers. Some
  families of fishermen are excused from tribute in consideration of the
  mysterious office which is performed by these Charons of the ocean.
  Each in his turn is summoned at the hour of midnight to hear the
  voices and even the names of the ghosts, he is sensible of their
  weight, and feels impelled by an unknown but irresistible power.”

Now we know how it was that the Romans could not conquer the Highlands.
But we also know that the Highlanders were not, when the Romans came,
the ignorant barbarians they are represented to have been, for Cæsar
ascertained from them that the coast line of Britain was two thousand
miles in length, an estimate not so very wide of the mark.

We are told by one fourteenth century historian that “In Scotland ye
shall find no man lightly of honour or gentleness, they be like wyld and
savage people;” and by another that “as to their faith and promise, they
hold it with great constancie,” statements which are not at all
contradictory. The once prevalent idea that a Highland chief was an
ignorant and unprincipled tyrant who rewarded the abject submission of
his followers with relentless cruelty and oppression was entirely
erroneous. He might be naturally ferocious or naturally weak, but in
either case the tribal system curbed excess, for the chief men of the
clan were his advisers, and without their approval he seldom decided on
extreme measures. But though the sway of the chiefs was thus mild in
practice, it was arbitrary, and they themselves were proud of their lot,
their lands, and their dependents. It is related of the lairds of Barra,
who belonged to one of the oldest and least-mixed septs in the
Highlands, that as soon as the family had dined it was customary for a
herald to sound a horn from the battlements on the castle tower,
proclaiming aloud in Gaelic, “Hear, oh! ye people! and listen, oh! ye
nations! The great Mac Neill of Barra having finished his meal, the
princes of the earth may dine.”

The peasantry of the Highlands were always noted for their hospitality.
“I have wandered,” says Mr. J. F. Campbell of Islay, than whom none knew
the Highlands better, “among the peasantry of many countries, and this
trip through the Highlands has but confirmed my old impressions. The
poorest Highlander is ever readiest to share the best he has with the
stranger. A kind word is never thrown away, and whatever may be the
faults of this people, I have never found a boor or a churl in a
Highland bothy.” Besides, the ancient Gaels were very fond of music,
whether in a merry or a sad humour. “It was,” says Bacon, “a sure sign
of brewing mischief when a Caledonian warrior was heard to hum his surly
song.” They accompanied most of their labours with music, either vocal
or that of the harp, and it was among these chiefs and these people that
the national music of Scotland took its rise. It is a matter of regret
that its wild strains are now more frequently heard amid Canadian woods
and on Australian plains than in the land where it was cradled.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER II.
                      HARPERS, BARDS, AND PIPERS.

           “O’er all this hazy realm is spread
           A halo of sad memories of the dead,
           Of mournful love tales, of old tragedies;
           Filling the heart with pity, and the eyes
           With tears at bare remembrance; and old songs
           Of Love’s endurance, Love’s despair, Love’s wrongs
           And triumphs o’er all obstacles at last,
           And all the grief and passion of the past.”

  Ancient musical instruments—Priestly harpers—Hereditary harpers—Irish
    _versus_ Scottish harpers—Royal harpers—Use of harp universal—Welsh
    sarcasm—Mary Queen of Scots’ harp—The last of the harpers—“The
    Harper of Mull”—From harp to pipes—The _Clarsach_—Pipes supplanting
    bards—The last clan bard—Bardic customs—Bards’ jealousy of pipes—The
    bard in battle—Duncan Ban Mac Intyre—Two pipers scared—When the
    pipes became paramount—The fiery cross—The coronach.


The harp was the immediate predecessor of the pipes; but in ancient
times, and also contemporary with the harp, there were other
instruments. The _Complaynt of Scotland_, written in 1548, speaking of a
company of musicians, says:—

  “The fyrst hed ane drone bagpipe, the next hed ane pipe made of ane
  bleddir and of ane reid, the third playit on ane trump, the feyerd on
  ane cornepipe, the fyfth playit on ane pipe made of ane grait horne,
  the sext playit on ane recorder, the sevint plait on ane fiddil, and
  the last on ane quhissel.”

We cannot speak as to quality, but there was evidently no lack of
quantity in these days.

[Illustration:

  HARPER: ON A STONE AT MONIFEITH

  From _Chalmers’ Sculptured Stones of Scotland_.
]

The _Horn of Battle_ was used by the ancient Caledonians to call their
armies together. The _cornu_ was blown by the Druids and their Christian
successors, and St. Patrick is represented as carrying one. Ancient
writers, indeed, lay particular stress on the musical ability of the
Celtic priesthood, the members of which they describe as possessing
extraordinary skill as harpers, taking prominent part with their
instruments in religious ceremonies. The _cornu_ in its rudest form was
a cow’s horn, and could sometimes be heard at a distance of six miles.
The Irish Celts had various other instruments, but the harp was the
favourite, both in Scotland and Ireland. The Hyperboreans, who are
believed to have been the aborigines of Britain, were celebrated
performers on the harp, accompanying their hymns with its music; and
harpers were hereditary attendants on the Scottish kings and the
Highland chiefs, from whom they had certain lands and perquisites. The
cultivation of harp music reached the highest level in Scotland, the
players beating their masters, the Irish harpers, although the class
were more honoured in Ireland than in Scotland. In Ireland none but a
freeman was allowed to play the harp, and it was reckoned a disgrace for
a gentleman not to have a harp and be able to play it. The Royal
household of Scotland always had a harper, whose rank was much higher
than that of the ordinary servant, and the kings even were not above
playing. James I. of Scotland, who died in 1437, was a better player
than any of the Scottish or Irish harpers. In Scotland, however, the use
of the harp ceased with the pomp of the feudal system, while in Ireland
the people retained for many generations an acknowledged superiority as
harpers.

It has been claimed for the harp that it is, or at least was, the
national instrument of Scotland. It is admitted that most of the
Highland chiefs had harpers, as well as bards, and that their music was
esteemed as of no small moment. In several old Highland castles the
harper’s seat is still pointed out, harps are mentioned in Ossian, but
not pipes; there is a field in Mull called “The Harper’s Field,” a
window in Duntulm castle called “The Harper’s Window,” it is a matter of
history that Donald, Lord of the Isles, was killed at Inverness by his
own harper, after the misfortunes which followed his incursion into
Atholl; and there are many other references which prove the universal
use of the instrument. But we have very few traces of itinerant harpers
in the Highlands resembling those of Ireland and Wales. In Wales it was
the acknowledged national instrument. The pipes were known for some
centuries, but the Britons never took kindly to them, a famous poet
comparing their notes to

          “The shrill screech of a lame goose caught in corn,”

or a

                    “Horrible, noisy, mad Irishman.”

Weakness in the use of metaphor was evidently not a characteristic of
Welsh poetry at this date. In Wales they “esteemed skill in playing on
the harp beyond any kind of learning,” but somehow the instrument never
got the same hold on the national life of Scotland. If it had, it would
not have been supplanted so easily as it was.

When the pipes actually superseded the harp in Scotland it is hardly
possible to discover. We read that when Mary Queen of Scots made a
hunting expedition into the wilds of Perthshire she carried a harp with
her, and that that same harp is still in existence; that John Garve Mac
Lean of Coll, who lived in the reign of James VI., was a good performer;
and that once upon a time an English vessel was wrecked on the island
and that the captain, seeing this venerable gentleman with his Bible in
his hand and a harp by his side, exclaimed—“King David is restored to
the earth”; and that the last of the harpers was Murdoch Mac Donald,
harper to Mac Lean of Coll. Mac Donald received his learning from
another celebrated harper, _Ruaraidh Dall_, or Blind Roderick, harper to
the laird of Mac Leod, and afterwards in Ireland; and from accounts of
payments made to him by Mac Lean, still extant, he seems to have
remained in the family till the year 1734, when he went to Quinish, in
Mull, where he died in 1739.

This Murdoch Mac Donald was the musician who was immortalised by
Tannahill as “The Harper of Mull.” The story which inspired this song is
quite romantic, and will bear repetition. The following abridgement is
from Mr. P. A. Ramsay’s edition of Tannahill’s poems;—

  “In the island of Mull there lived a harper who was distinguished for
  his professional skill, and was attached to Rosie, the fairest flower
  in the island, and soon made her his bride. Not long afterwards he set
  out on a visit to some low-country friends, accompanied by his Rosie,
  and carrying his harp, which had been his companion in all his
  journeys for many years. Overtaken by the shades of night, in a
  solitary part of the country, a cold faintness fell upon Rosie, and
  she sank, almost lifeless, into the harper’s arms. He hastily wrapped
  his plaid round her shivering frame, but to no purpose. Distracted, he
  hurried from place to place in search of fuel, to revive the dying
  embers of life. None could be found. His harp lay on the grass, its
  neglected strings vibrating to the blast. The harper loved it as his
  own life, but he loved his Rosie better than either. His nervous arm
  was applied to its sides, and ere long it lay crackling and blazing on
  the heath. Rosie soon revived under its genial influence, and resumed
  the journey when morning began to purple the east. Passing down the
  side of a hill, they were met by a hunter on horseback, who addressed
  Rosie in the style of an old and familiar friend. The harper, innocent
  himself, and unsuspicious of others, paced slowly along, leaving her
  in converse with the stranger. Wondering at her delay, he turned round
  and beheld the faithless fair seated behind the hunter on his steed,
  which speedily bore them out of sight. The unhappy harper, transfixed
  with astonishment, gazed at them. Then, slowly turning his steps
  homewards, he, sighing, exclaimed—‘Fool that I was to burn my harp for
  her!’”

It is said that Tannahill first heard this story at a convivial meeting,
as an instance of the infidelity of the fair sex, whose fidelity he had
been strenuously defending, notwithstanding that he himself was
disappointed in the only love affair in which he was ever seriously
engaged. The impression which the narrative made upon his mind led him
to the composition of the song:—

        “When Rosie was faithfu’ how happy was I!
        Still gladsome as simmer the time glided by;
        I played my harp cheery while proudly I sang
        O’ the charms o’ my Rosie the winter nichts lang;
        But now I’m as waefu’ as waefu’ can be,
        Come simmer, come winter, it’s a’ ane to me,
        For the dark gloom o’ falsehood sae clouds my sad soul,
        That cheerless for aye is the Harper o’ Mull.

        “I wander the glens and the wild woods alone,
        In their deepest recesses I make my sad moan;
        My harp’s mournfu’ melody joins in the strain,
        While sadly I sing o’ the days that are gane.
        Tho’ Rosie is faithless she’s no the less fair,
        And the thocht o’ her beauty but feeds my despair,
        Wi’ painfu’ remembrance my bosom is full,
        An’ weary o’ life is the Harper o’ Mull.

        “As slumbering I lay by the dark mountain stream,
        My lovely young Rosie appeared in my dream;
        I thocht her still kind, and I ne’er was sae blest
        As in fancy I clasped the fair Nymph to my breast.
        Thou fause, fleeting vision, too soon thou were o’er,
        Thou wak’d’st me to tortures unequalled before,
        But death’s silent slumbers my grief soon shall lull,
        An’ the green grass wave o’er the Harper o’ Mull.”

The transition from the harp to the bagpipe was spread over about two
centuries. In 1565 George Buchanan speaks of the Highlanders using both
instruments, and during the seventeenth century the use of the harp
declined to such an extent that the number of professional harpers was
very small indeed. The civil wars largely accounted for this, as the
fitness of the bagpipe for the tumult of battle gave it an easy
superiority over the harp. Writing at the beginning of the eighteenth
century, Alexander Macdonald, the Keppoch bard, said he preferred the
pipes to the harp, which he called _ceol nionag_, maidens’ music. When
the bards thus openly avowed their liking for the pipes, the transition
period was over, for the harp was wont to be their favourite instrument.
The harp still exists as the _clarsach_, which is being revived by
Highland Associations, more especially in Glasgow, but, if the Irishism
may be permitted, the bagpipe is now “the harp of the Gael.”

Besides supplanting the harp, the pipes also supplanted the bards
themselves. The bards were in their day a more important body of men
than the harpers, and naturally much more relating to them has come down
to posterity. They existed from the remotest period of which there are
any records, and it was only in 1726 that, with the death of Neil Mac
Vuirich, the Clan Ranald bard, the race of distinctively clan bards
became extinct. The race continued to exist—bards exist to this day for
that matter—but not as clan bards, and after 1726 they were only public
makers of verse.

The bards, like the harpers, though to a greater extent, wandered from
house to house, keeping alive among the people the memories of their
wrongs, celebrating the valour of their warriors, the beauty of their
women, and the glory of their chiefs. The calling was held in such high
esteem that after the fall of Druidism it was maintained at the expense
of the State. The bards, however, became so numerous, overbearing, and
extortionate that they lost favour, many of them were killed by their
enemies, and those left, shorn of their pride, but retaining their
skill, occupied honourable positions in the retinues of their chiefs. In
the heyday of their glory the bards summoned the clans to battle, and
they moved about among the men inciting them to deeds of valour, their
own persons being held as inviolable by friend and foe. The leaders
looked to them to inspire the warriors, just as at the present day
pipers are expected to supply enthusiasm to the regiment when on the eve
of battle. The bard exhorted the clans to emulate the glory of their
forefathers, to hold their lives cheap in the defence of their country,
and his appeals, delivered with considerable elocutionary power and
earnestness, always produced a profound effect. When the pipes began to
be used, they took the place of the bard when the din of battle drowned
his voice, and after the battle was over the bard celebrated the praises
of the brave who had fallen and the valour of the survivors, while the
piper played plaintive laments for the slain. The bards themselves did
not always fight—they thought they were of more value as bards than as
fighters. At the battle of Inverlochy, _Ian Lom_, the Lochaber bard, and
the most celebrated of the race, was asked to share in the fighting, but
declined. “If I go along with thee to-day, Sir Alasdair,” said he, “and
fall in battle, who will sing thy victory to-morrow?” “Thou art in the
right, John,” said his chief, “Let the shoemaker stick to his last.”
_Ian Lom_, however, is acknowledged to have been a brave man, and his
attitude on this occasion is not considered a reflection on his
character.

The bard, especially if he were also a musician, was always in great
request at social functions, and in the absence of books he constituted
the local library. The class had naturally exceptional memories, and
they became walking chroniclers of past events and preservers of popular
poetry and everyday history. They did not welcome the pipes with any
degree of enthusiasm. Instead, some of them used all their arts to throw
ridicule on the newer instrument. _Ian Mac Codrum_, the North Uist bard
(1710–1796), composed a satire on the bagpipe of one, _Domhnull Bhan_,
or Fair-haired Donald, which is exceedingly humorous and sarcastic, and
in the course of which he says:—

                     “It withered with yelping
                     The seven Fenian battalions,”

whatever they were. Then, he continued, the Gael loved the pipes as
Edinburgh people loved tea, although the pipes had weakened for the
first time

                “The strength of Diarmaid and of Goll.”

The last bard known to have acted officially in battle was Mac Mhuirich,
or Mac Vuirich, the Clan Ranald bard of the day, who recited at the
battle of Harlaw, in 1411. Mac Mhuirich was disgusted at the growing
popularity of the pipes, and composed a set of verses descriptive of the
bagpipe and its lineage, which are more graphic, humorous and forcible
than elegant or gentlemanly. Duncan Ban Mac Intyre, the bard of
Glenorchy, has a poem on “Hugh the Piper,” who, it seems, had insulted
the bard in some way. Hugh is compared to a wicked dog barking at the
passers-by, and intent on biting their heels. He is to be hurled out of
the society of bards and pipers as a fruitless bough is cut away from a
flourishing tree, it is hinted that if he would quit the country it
would be a good riddance, he is made the impersonation of all sorts of
defects, and his musical efforts are compared to the cries of ducks,
geese, and pigs. It should be added, however, that the same bard
composed _Ben Dorain_, the most famous of his poems, to a pipe tune,
dividing it into eight parts corresponding to the variations of the
pibroch, and moulding the language into all the variations of the wild
rhythm, so his spite must have been more at Hugh himself than at his
music.

The antipathy of the bards to the pipes is easily understood. They had
all along been the acknowledged inspired leaders of the people, inciting
the clans to battle with their wild verses. The pipes with all their war
spirit could hardly match this, which is culled from a battle song
supposed to have been written on the eve of the invasion of England that
terminated so tragically at Flodden:—

                 “Burn their women, lean and ugly!
                 Burn their children great and small!
                 In the hut and in the palace,
                 Prince and peasant, burn them all!
                 Plunge them in the swelling rivers,
                 With their gear and with their goods;
                 Spare, while breath remains, no Saxon,
                 Drown them in the roaring floods.”

Neil Mac Mhuirich, the bard already mentioned, had been at a bards’
college in Ireland, and brought back to his father’s house not only
stores of knowledge, but also the small-pox. Afflicted with the disease,
he lay on a bed near the fire, where John and Donald Mac Arthur, two of
the famous race of pipers, came in, and sitting down in front of his
bed, began tuning their pipes. The discordant sounds raised the bard,
and he, bursting with indignation, started railing at the pipes in a
poetical and mock genealogy of the instrument. The poem itself is
presentable in Gaelic, but in English it would be too much for the
average reader. It emphasises strongly the bard’s aversion to the pipes,
comparing them and their music to many ridiculous things in nature and
art. The pipers, who had intended to make the house their quarters for
the night, were startled by the fierce invective coming from behind
them, and on looking round and seeing the swollen and marked face of
Neil, worked up into extraordinary excitement, terror took hold of them
and they fled in consternation. The bard’s father evidently sympathised
with his son, for he waited patiently until the poem was ended, and then
exclaimed “Well done, my son, your errand to Ireland has not been in
vain.”

When the pipes became paramount is about as difficult to determine as
when they first threatened the position of the harp. They seem to have
existed alongside the harp and the coronach and the fiery cross for a
considerable time, as we have references to all these in the literature
of the sixteenth and seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. John Mac Leod
of Dunvegan, who lived about 1650, had a bard, a harper, a piper, and a
fool, all of whom were most liberally provided for. We have got a blind
harper, _Ruaraidh Dall_, harper to Mac Leod of Glenelg, and a blind
piper, _Ian Dall_, piper to Mac Kenzie of Gairloch, each of whom
excelled in his own sphere, and both of whom flourished about 1650,
while, as we have seen, the bards and the pipers were often at
loggerheads. The pibroch did not supersede the fiery cross at all, for,
so long as the chiefs found it necessary to call the clans together, the
goat was killed with the chief’s own sword, the cross was dipped in the
blood, and the clansman sent round.

The last battle at which a bard recited was fought in 1411, the last
clan bard died in 1726, the last clan harper in 1739, when the
hereditary pipers were in all their glory; the fiery cross was last used
in 1745, when it travelled thirty-six miles through Breadalbane in three
hours, and the coronach was superseded gradually by the lament of the
pipes. The bards ceased to live as an order on the accession of the
Kings of Scotland to the British throne, and there were no means
provided at the Reformation for educating ministers or teachers for the
Gaelic speaking part of the country. But all through the centuries
covered by the dates given there were pipers. There are pipers still,
not indeed clan pipers, but the class are recognised as peculiarly
belonging to the Highlands, while harpers and bards have gone completely
under in the great social revolution through which the Highlands have
passed.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER III.
                         THE TALE OF THE YEARS.

                 “No stroke of art their texture bears,
                 No cadence wrought with learned skill,
                 And though long worn by rolling years,
                 Yet unimpaired they please us still;
                 While thousand strains of mystic lore
                 Have perished and are heard no more.”

  The time of the Flood—Pipes in Scripture—In Persia—In Arabia—In
    Tarsus—Tradition of the Nativity—In Rome—In Greece—In Wales,
    Ireland, and Scotland—Melrose Abbey—In France—In England—At
    Bannockburn—Chaucer—In war—First authentic Scottish reference—Oldest
    authentic specimen—Became general—Rosslyn Chapel—Second drone added—
    At Flodden—“A maske of bagpypes”—Spenser—Shakespeare—James VI.—A
    poetical historian—Big drone added—The ’45—Native to Scotland—The
    evolution of the Highlands.


_Gillidh Callum_ was (so goes the story) Noah’s piper, and (still
according to the story) Noah danced to his music over two crossed vine
plants when he had discovered and enjoyed the inspiring effects of his
first distillation from the fruits of his newly planted vineyard. So the
tune was named after the piper. This “yarn,” to give it the only
appropriate name, can easily be spoiled by anyone who tries, but the
dance alluded to does seem to have been originally practised over vine
plants. Swords, however, came to be more numerous in Scotland than
vines, and they were substituted. Some historians assert that the Celts
are descended from Gomer, the eldest son of Japheth, son of Noah, a
theory which would go far to support the _Gillidh Callum_ story, for if
there were Celts in the days of the ark, why should there not have been
a piper? There is, however, just about as much to prove either story as
there is to prove that

                    “Music first on earth was found
                      In Gaelic accents deep;
                    When Jubal in his oxter squeezed
                      The blether o’ a sheep,”

and that is little enough.

That the bagpipe is an instrument of great antiquity is an admitted
fact, but whether it is one of those referred to in Scripture is another
matter. The pipe without the bag is mentioned in I. Sam. x. 5, Isaiah v.
12, and Jer. xlviii. 36, but the pipe without the bag is not the
bagpipe. There have been many attempts made to identify the instrument
with one or other of those named in Scripture, and in histories of
Scripture times, but these are all based on conjecture. An instrument is
mentioned which was composed of two reeds perforated according to rule,
and united to a leathern bag, called in Persian _nie amban_; and in
Egypt a similar instrument is described as consisting of two flutes,
partly of wood and partly of iron. Another traveller tells of an Arabian
instrument which consisted of a double chanter with several apertures,
and in 1818 ancient engravings were found in the northern states of
Africa which seemed to prove that an instrument like the bagpipe had
existed in Scripture times. The Chaldeans and Babylonians had two
peculiar instruments, the _Sambuka_ and the _Symphonia_, and some
historians identify the latter as the _sackbut_, the alleged ancestor of
the bagpipe. Others assert that a form of the bagpipe was used in the
services of the Temple at Jerusalem, but this in any case, may be
treated as the merest of conjecture.

The historical references to the instrument as having existed at all in
these days are few and far between:—

385 B.C.—Theocritus, a writer who flourished about this date, mentions
it incidentally in his pastorals, but not in such a way as to give any
indication of what form it assumed.

200 B.C.—An ancient terra cotta excavated at Tarsus by Mr. W.
Burchhardt, and supposed to date from 200 B.C., represents a piper with
a wind instrument with vertical rows of reed pipes, firmly attached to
him. The instrument has also been found sculptured in ancient Nineveh.

A.D. 1.—There is a singular tradition in the Roman Catholic Church to
the effect that the shepherds who first saw the infant Messiah in the
stable expressed their gladness by playing on the bagpipe. This is, of
course, possible, but there is only the tradition and the likelihood
that the shepherds would have musical instruments of some kind to
support the theory. Albrecht Durer, a famous German artist of the 16th
century, has perpetuated the idea in a woodcut of the Nativity, in which
he represents one of the shepherds playing on the pipes, but his work
is, naturally, founded on the tradition. The illuminator of a Dutch
missal in the library of King’s College, Aberdeen, has taken liberties
with the tradition and given the bagpipe to one of the appearing angels,
who uses it for playing a salute.

[Illustration:

  REPRODUCED FROM A CONTORNIATE IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM.
]

A.D. 54.—The cruel Emperor Nero was an accomplished musician, and a
contorniate of his time has given rise to many assertions connecting him
with the pipes. It is generally referred to as a coin, but it is in
reality a contorniate or medal, which was given away at public sports.
The sketch here reproduced (full-size) is from a specimen in the British
Museum, and very little study will show that it proves almost nothing
relating to the bagpipe. The obverse bears the head of Nero and the
usual inscription. On the reverse there seems to be the form of a wind
organ with nine irregular pipes, all blown by a bellows and having
underneath what is probably a bag. It is more closely related to the
organ than to the bagpipe, and, as has been said, it proves nothing.
Some writers call the instrument on which Nero played a flute with a
bladder under the performer’s arm, a description which does more to
identify it as the bagpipe. It cannot have been considered a very
honourable thing in Nero’s day to play the pipes, for the emperor on
hearing of the last revolt, that which cost him his throne and his life,
vowed solemnly that if the gods would but extricate him from his
troubles he would play in public on the bagpipe, as a sort of penance or
thank offering probably. Perhaps history has made a mistake, and it may
have been the pipes and not the fiddle Nero played on while Rome was
burning. The medal, it may be added, is believed by the authorities at
the British Museum to date from about A.D. 330, although it bears the
impress of Nero.

That the instrument was in use among the Romans is indisputable. A
historian, who wrote a history of the wars of the Persians, the Vandals,
and the Goths, states that the Roman infantry used it for marching
purposes, and he describes it as having both skin and wood extremely
fine. The name it went by was _pythaula_, a word of Greek origin, which
bears a striking resemblance to the Celtic _piob-mhala_, pronounced
_piovala_. There is in Rome a fine Greek sculpture in _basso relievo_
representing a piper playing on an instrument closely resembling the
Highland bagpipe, the performer himself being dressed not unlike a
modern Highlander. It is shown besides on several coins, but from the
rudeness of the drawings or their decay the exact form cannot be
ascertained. A small bronze figure found under Richborough Castle, Kent,
represents a Roman soldier playing on the bagpipe, but his whole
equipment is curious. The precise form of the instrument itself is
questionable, and the manner of holding it, the helmet, the ancient
purse on one side and the short Roman sword and dagger on the other, all
furnish matter for debate. About 1870 a stone was dug from the ground
near Bo’ness, on which was sculptured a party of Roman soldiers on the
march. They were dressed in short kilts, and one was playing the
bagpipe. The instrument was very similar to those of the present day
except that the drones were shorter.

A.D. 100.—Aristides Quintilianus, who lived about this time, writes to
the effect that the bagpipe was known in the Scottish Highlands in his
day. This, however, may be set aside as a reference of no value seeing
that the Highlands was then an unknown world to the Greeks. The Greeks
of the same age knew the instrument as _Tibia utricularis_, and from the
pipes, we are told, the Athenian shepherds drew the sweetest sounds.
Other books again tell us that the Athenians rejected the pipes because
they disturbed conversation and made hearing difficult. Still others—
English be it noted—contain the sentence, “Arcadia in Greece: the
bagpipe was first invented here,” but the statement is not substantiated
in any way.

A.D. 500.—In the sixth century the bagpipe is mentioned by Procopius, a
Greek historian, as the instrument of the Roman infantry, the trumpet
being that of the cavalry.

A.D. 800.—There is a picture of a primitive instrument copied from a
manuscript of the ninth century. It consists of a blow pipe on one side
of a small bag, with a sort of chanter having three or four holes and a
beast’s head instead of the usual bell-shaped end. The instrument was
held extended from the mouth, and the bag, if any pressure was
necessary, must have been elastic, as it could not be pressed in any
way.

A.D. 1118.—Giraldus Cambrensis, the historian, mentions the pipes about
this date as Welsh and Irish, but not as Scottish. But _The Complaynt of
Scotland_, written in 1548, states that the instrument was a favourite
with the Scottish peasantry “from the earliest periods.” Another
trustworthy record says it was in use in Scotland and Wales about the
end of the twelfth century. Besides, Pennant in his _Tour_ was told that
it was mentioned in the oldest northern songs as the “soeck-pipe.” There
is little doubt it was cultivated to some extent in Scotland in the
twelfth century.

A.D. 1136.—There are, or at least were, in Melrose Abbey, built in 1136,
two carvings representing bagpipes, but they are not supposed to be of a
date so early as the abbey itself. The first, that of an aged musician,
is given in Sir John Graham Dalziel’s _Musical Memoirs of Scotland_,
published in 1849, but it cannot now be found in the abbey. If it
existed when the book was written, it has succumbed since then to the
action of the elements or the vandalism of the ignorant. The second,
sketched on the spot, is one of those grotesque carvings which artists
of early days, in what must have been a sarcastic humour, delighted in
affixing to sacred buildings. It is a gargoyle in the form of a pig
carrying a rude bagpipe under its head with the drone, the only pipe now
remaining, on its left shoulder, and its fore feet, what is left of
them, clasped around the bag. The mouth is open and the rain water off
the roof runs through it. There is a tradition that as James IV. was not
agreeing very well with the Highlanders the pig playing their favourite
instrument was placed in the abbey as a satire. The chapel, however, on
the outside of the nave of which the carving is, was built before the
time of James IV. It is curious that all, or nearly all, the carvings on
the outside of the abbey are ugly, some of them gruesome, while the
figures on the inside are beautiful. This, it is supposed, was meant to
convey the idea of Heaven inside and earth outside. In the architecture
of the middle ages the gargoyle, or waterspout, assumed a vast variety
of forms, often frightful, fantastic or grotesque. So the carving in
Melrose Abbey may be simply the product of the artist’s imagination.
Besides, a French architect had a good deal to do with the abbey, so the
designs may not all be emblematic of Scottish life of the date when they
were made. In _Musical Memoirs of Scotland_ it is stated that the
instrument had two drones, one on each side of the animal’s head, and a
chanter which hung beneath its feet, these latter being placed on the
apertures. The figure seems to have been very much worn away since this
book was written.

[Illustration:

  CARVINGS IN MELROSE ABBEY
]

A.D. 1200.—Coming down to ages of which we have better historical
records, we find a drawing of the thirteenth century which shows a girl
dancing on the shoulders of a jester to the music of the instrument in
its simplest form, the chanter only.

A.D. 1300.—About the end of the thirteenth century the bagpipe in France
was consigned to the lower orders, and only used by the blind and the
wandering or mendicant classes. Polite society, however, resumed it in
the time of Louis XIV. and Louis XV.

A.D. 1307.—Several payments to performers of the fourteenth and
subsequent centuries are recorded. In the reign of Edward II. there is a
payment to _Jauno Chevretter_ (the latter word meant bagpiper) for
playing before the king.

A.D. 1314.—The Clan Menzies are alleged to have had their pipes with
them at Bannockburn, and they are supposed to have been played by one of
the Mac Intyres, their hereditary pipers. The Clan Menzies claim that
these pipes are still in existence, at least three portions of them—the
chanter, which has the same number of finger holes as the modern
chanter, but two additional holes on each side; the blowpipe, which is
square, but graduates to round at the top; and the drone, of which the
top half only remains. These relics, which are now preserved with great
care, are supposed to be the remains of a set which were played to the
clan when they mustered at Castle Menzies, and marched to join the main
body of the Scottish army at Torwood, and in front of them on the field
of battle. There are said to be Mac Donald pipes in existence, which
consist of a chanter and blowpipe only, and which, it is alleged, were
played before the Mac Donalds at Bannockburn. This, most likely, also
refers to the Menzies pipes, as the Mac Intyres, who are credited with
having been owners of each, were at different times pipers to the
Menzies and to the Clan Ranald branch of the Mac Donalds. Bruce’s son,
says another tradition, had pipes at Bannockburn. Sir Walter Scott
represents the men of the Isles as charging to the sound of the bagpipe;
and David Mac Donald, a Clan Mac Donald bard, who wrote about 1838, in a
poem on the battle, says that when the bards began to encourage the
clans, the pipers began to blow their pipes. There is, however, no
historical proof that the instrument was used at the battle. Though
horns and trumpets are mentioned by reliable historians, it is not till
about two hundred years later that the bagpipe is referred to as having
superseded the trumpet as an instrument of war.

A.D. 1327.—In the reign of Edward III. two pipers received permission to
visit schools for minstrels beyond the seas, and from about that time
till the sixteenth century the bagpipe was the favourite instrument of
the Irish kerns.

A.D. 1362.—There is an entry in the Exchequer rolls of 1362 of forty
shillings “paid to the King’s pipers,” which indicates the use of the
pipes at that date.

A.D. 1370.—The arms of Winchester School, founded in 1370, show an angel
playing a bagpipe, and a silver-mounted crosier, presented by the
founder to the New College, Oxford, has among other figures that of an
angel playing the bagpipe. Some enthusiast might surely have adduced the
frequent connections of the instrument with angels as proof of its
sacred origin.

A.D. 1377.—One “claryoner,” two trumpeters, and four pipers were
attached to the fleet of Richard, Earl of Arundel (Richard II). The
bagpipe often appears in the English sculpture of the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries, and, of course, very frequently later.

A.D. 1380.—There are no English literary references to the pipes till
the time of Chaucer, when the poet makes the miller in the _Canterbury
Tales_ play on the instrument:—

             “A baggepipe wel cowde he blowe and sowne,
             And therewithal he broughte us out of towne.”

So it seems that the company of pilgrims left London, accompanied by the
strains of the bagpipe. It must have been in fairly general use, else
the poet would not have worked it into his composition, but there are no
means of discovering how long before this it had been in favour in
England.

A.D. 1390.—At the battle between the clans Quhale and Chattan on the
North Inch of Perth, Rev. James Mac Kenzie tells us in his _History of
Scotland_, which is generally accepted as authoritative, the clans
“stalked into the barriers to the sound of their own great war pipes.”

A.D. 1400.—The bagpipe is supposed to have been first used officially in
war in Britain at the beginning of the fifteenth century, quickly
superseding the war-song of the bards.

A.D. 1406–37.—James I. of Scotland played on the “chorus,” a word which
some interpret as meaning the bagpipe. Besides we are also told that he
played on “the tabour, the bagpipes, the organ, the flute, the harp, the
trumpet, and the shepherd’s reed.” He must have been a versatile
monarch. If he really wrote _Peblis to the Play_, the fact proves that
if he did not play the pipes he was quite familiar with their existence,
for he says:—

                “With that Will Swane came smeitand out,
                  Ane meikle miller man,
                Gif I sall dance have done, lat se
                  Blow up the bagpype than.”

And also in another place:—

                  “The bag pipe blew and they outhrew
                    Out of the townis untald.”

Except that he gives us the first really authentic historical Scottish
reference to the pipes, King James and his connection with the music is
rather a puzzling subject.

A.D. 1409.—What is believed to be the oldest authentic specimen of the
bagpipe now existing is that in the possession of Messrs. J. & R. Glen,
of Edinburgh, which bears the date 1409. Except that it wants the large
drone, which was added at the beginning of the eighteenth century, it is
very much the Highland pipe of the present day. The following is a
description of the instrument:—

  “Highland bagpipe, having two small drones and chanter, finely
  ornamented with Celtic patterns carved in circular bands. The drones
  are inserted in a stock apparently formed from a forked branch, the
  fork giving the drones their proper spread for the shoulder. In the
  centre of the stock are the letters ‘R. Mc D,’ below them a galley,
  and below the galley is the date in Roman numerals, M:CCCC:IX. The
  letters both in the initials above the galley and in the numeral
  inscription are of the Gothic form commonly used in the fifteenth
  century. On the reverse of the stock is a triplet of foliageous scroll
  work. Bands of interlaced work encircle the ends of the forked part,
  which are bound with brass ferrules. The lower joint of one of the
  drones is ornamented with a band of interlaced work in the centre. The
  corresponding joint of the other drone is not original. The upper
  joints of the drones are ornamented at both extremities with
  interlaced work and the finger holes, seven in number, are greatly
  worn. The nail heads placed round the lower part of the bell of the
  chanter are decorated with engraved ornament. The bag and blowpipe are
  modern.”

It should be added that very little is known of the story of this old
bagpipe, and the date carved on the stock is all that justifies us in
attributing it to the fifteenth century. Also that its claims to
antiquity are disputed by an instrument in the possession of the Duke of
Sutherland, which is said to have been played at the battle of
Sheriffmuir.

A.D. 1411.—We have the statement of Rev. James Mac Kenzie that at the
Battle of Harlaw the Highland host came down “with pibrochs deafening to
hear.” Mr. Mac Kenzie, however, wrote at quite a recent date, and it
would be interesting to know his authority. We do know, of course, that
what is now a pipe tune was played at Harlaw, but that in itself proves
nothing, since the earliest known copy of the music is not arranged for
the pipes.

A.D. 1419.—An inventory of the instruments in St. James’s Palace, made
in 1419, specifies “four bagpipes with pipes of ivorie,” and another
“baggepipe with pipes of ivorie, the bagge covered with purple vellat.”

A.D. 1430.—From this time on till the Reformation the bagpipe was fairly
popular in the Lowlands of Scotland, and it is most likely that its use
became general in the Highlands about 1500.

A.D. 1431.—At the battle of Inverlochy in 1431, we are told the pipes
were played. This may have been supposed from the fact that we have a
pipe tune of that date, but it is probable enough.

[Illustration:

  THE OLDEST EXISTING PIPES

  (_By permission of Messrs. J. & R. Glen and the Scottish Society of
    Antiquaries._)
]

A.D. 1440.—In Rosslyn Chapel, Midlothian, built in 1440, there are two
figures represented as playing the pipes. The first, an angelic piper,
is of a class of which specimens are to be found in various sacred
edifices throughout England. It is in the Lady Chapel, and is not
therefore much noticed by visitors. The other figure is one of a pair
which are carved as if they were supporting one end of one of the arches
of the roof. What meaning they were supposed to convey it is impossible
now to determine, but the representation of the piper is obvious enough.

A.D. 1485–1509.—In Henry VII.’s Chapel at Westminster there is a
grotesque carving representing a bagpipe. Similar carvings appear at
Hull, Great Yarmouth, Beverley, and Boston.

A.D. 1489.—In July, 1489, we find there was a payment of £8 8s. to
“Inglis pyparis that com to the Castel (Edinburgh) and playit to the
king;” and in 1505 another to “Inglis pipar with the drone.” So the
instrument must have been as much English as Scottish at that time.

A.D. 1491.—Here again we find the “Inglis” piper to the front. In August
of this year a party of them received seven unicorns, that is gold
coins, at Linlithgow for playing to the king. Both of these payments are
recorded in the accounts of the treasurer of the Royal household.

A.D. 1494.—In the ninth year of Henry VII. there was paid to “Pudsey,
piper on the bagpipes,” 6s. 8d. Piping was not a short cut to fortune
then more than it is now.

A.D. 1500.—At a sale of curios in London in the summer of 1899 a jug was
disposed of on which there was a painting of a mule playing a bagpipe.
The article fetched £200, but it cannot be proved that the painting
dates from the sixteenth century, though that is the certified date of
the jug. About this time the second drone was added.

[Illustration:

  CARVINGS IN ROSSLYN CHAPEL
]

A.D. 1506–1582.—George Buchanan is the first to mention the bagpipe in
connection with Gaelic-speaking people, and when he does mention it, it
is solely as a military instrument. The harp was still the domestic
musical instrument.

A.D. 1509–1547.—We have a curious set of wood-cuts of the time of Henry
VIII., one of which represents a piper dancing to the _Dance of Death_
clothed according to the fashion of that time. He is dancing with a
jester, who has the tonsure of a monk and wears a sort of kilt.[1] We
also know of a suit of armour made for Henry VIII. on which the figure
of a piper is engraved.

Footnote 1:

  See Chap. XV.

A.D. 1513.—It is on record that John Hastie, the celebrated hereditary
piper of Jedburgh, played at the battle of Flodden. There is a painting
of this date by the German artist, Albrecht Durer, which represents a
shepherd boy playing to his sheep on the bagpipe, and another which
shows a piper leaning against a tree with a naked dirk at the left side
and a purse exactly like a sporran suspended in front. Olaus Magnus, a
Swedish prelate of the same century, affirms that a double pipe,
probably the bagpipe, was carried by the shepherds to the pastures that
their flocks might feed better.

A.D. 1529.—At a procession in Brussels in 1529 in honour of the Virgin
Mary, “many wild beasts danced round a cage containing two apes playing
on the bagpipes.” This statement may be taken for what it is worth. It
is difficult to construct a theory that will explain it.

A.D. 1536.—In this year the bagpipe was played at church service in
Edinburgh.

[Illustration:

  GERMAN PIPER OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY

  _From the Painting by Albrecht Durer._
]

A.D. 1547–1553.—Among the musicians of Edward VI. at the Court of
England was “Richard Woodward, bagpiper,” who had a salary of £12 13s.
4d., not a princely sum. An entertainment was got up at court in this
reign, part of which was a “maske of bagpypes.” An artist “covered six
apes of paste and cement with grey coney skinnes, which were made to
serve for a maske of bagpypes, to sit upon the top of them like
mynstrells as though they did play.” The English of these ancient
writers is often a bit obscure, but this seems to mean that there was an
imitation of bagpipe playing by counterfeit apes. The Brussels incident
of 1529 may probably be explained in the same way.

A.D. 1548.—Among the eight musical instruments mentioned in _The
Complaynt of Scotland_, written in 1548, there are included “ane drone
bagpipe” and “ane pipe made of ane bleddir and of ane reid.”[2]

Footnote 2:

  See page 18.

A.D. 1549.—A French officer describing warfare near Edinburgh in 1549,
says “The wild Scots encouraged themselves to arms by the sounds of
their bagpipes.”

A.D. 1556.—In 1556 the Queen Regent of Scotland headed a procession in
honour of St. Giles, the patron saint of Edinburgh, and she was
“accompanied by bagpipers and other musicians.”

A.D. 1570.—In 1570 three St. Andrews pipers were admonished not to play
on Sundays or at nights.

A.D. 1579.—We next come across Spenser and Shakespeare. In the
_Shepherd’s Calendar_, Spenser makes a shepherd ask a down-hearted
comrade:—

            “Or is thy bagpipe broke that sounds so sweet?”

And Shakespeare, whose genius touched on everything above the earth and
under it, but who does not seem to have had a high opinion of the
“sweetness” of the bagpipe, says of a character that he is as melancholy
as a glib cat, or a lugged bear, or an old lion, or a lover’s lute, or
the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe. In another place he speaks of men
who “laugh, like parrots at a bagpiper,” and in yet another he infers
that the instrument was more powerful than others then in use. “You
would never,” he says, “dance again after a tabor or pipe; no, the
bagpipe could not move you.” He seems, however, to have known the
utility even of his English pipes for marching purposes, for he
concludes _Much ado about Nothing_ with “Strike up, Pipers.” This
phrase, by the way, must surely have been taken from the play, for it is
always held as referring more to the bagpipe than to any other
instrument. Generally speaking, Shakespeare’s references are more in the
way of sarcasm than of praise.

A.D. 1581.—In 1581 we find James VI. returning from church at Dalkeith
one Sunday with two pipers playing before him; and, strangely enough, a
little nearer the end of the century, we read, two pipers were
prosecuted for playing on the Sunday. At various times between 1591 and
1596 pipers from the Water of Leith bound themselves strictly not to
play on the Sundays. There was evidently one law for the king and
another for the subject.

A.D. 1584.—A poetical historian describing a battle between the English
and the Irish in 1584 says:—

                 “Now goe the foes to wracke,
                 The Karne apace do sweate,
                 And bagg pipe then instead of trompe
                 Doe lulle the backe retreate.

                 “Who hears the bagpipe now?
                 The pastyme is so hotte,
                 Our valiant captains will not cease
                 Till that the field be gotte.

                 “But still thei forward pearse,
                 Upon the glibbed route,
                 And with thar weapons meete for warre,
                 These vaunting foes they cloute.”

Then, when the battle was over, the piper having been killed:—

                   “The bagpipe cease to plaie,
                   The piper lyes on grounde;
                   And here a sort of glibbed theeves
                   Devoid of life are found.”

It is difficult to see how an instrument like the present Irish bagpipe
could be of any use in war; but in 1601 a traveller, visiting the same
country, confirms the statement that it belonged to the military.

In 1584 a man named Cockran “played on his bagpipe in a dramatic
performance in Coventry.” An Irish bagpipe has been seen in London
theatres on various occasions, and, of course, often enough in Scottish
concert rooms. In 1798 a Mr. Courtney “played a solo on the union pipes
in the quick movement of the overture with good effect” in a performance
founded on Ossian’s poems.

A.D. 1594.—At the Battle of Balrinnes, a witch who accompanied the Earl
of Argyll referred in a prediction to the bagpipe as the principal
military instrument of the Scottish mountaineers.

A.D. 1597.—In a court case at Stirling in 1597 we are told that “W.
Stewart brought into the kirkyard twa or three pyperis, and thereby drew
in grit nowmer of people to dans befoir the kirk dur on tyme of
prayeris, he being always the ringleader himself.” Mr. Stewart must have
had peculiar ideas of the fitness of things.

A.D. 1598.—An unpublished poem by Rev. Alex. Hume, minister of Logie,
about 1598, contains the lines:—

               “Caus michtilie the warlie nottes brake
               On Heiland pipes, Scottes and Hyberniche.”

So at this date there was a difference between the Highland pipes, the
Lowland, and the Hibernian. The instrument was, in fact, becoming
recognised as peculiar to the Highlands, in the one specific form at
least.

A.D. 1601.—In 1601 Moryson, the traveller, visiting Ireland during a
rebellion, says that “near Armagh a strong body of insurgents approached
the camp of regulars with cries and sounds of drummers and bagpipes as
if they would storm the camp. After that our men had given them a volley
in their teeth, they drew away, and we heard no more of their drummers
and bagpipes, but only mournful cries, for many of their best men were
slain.”

A.D. 1617.—When James I. came to Scotland in 1617 and decorated Holyrood
with images of many kinds, he did not clear out the bagpipes from the
Palace, jokingly remarking that as they had some relation to the organ
they might remain.

A.D. 1623.—Playing on the “great pipe” was a charge made against a piper
at Perth in 1623. The term great pipe would seem to indicate that the
instrument was evolved from a previous kind, and is an argument in
favour of the theory that the pipes were not “introduced” into Scotland,
but are of native origin, and have been gradually developed up to their
present condition.

A.D. 1650.—“Almost every town hath bagpipes in it,” says a writer of the
year 1650.

A.D. 1653.—In 1653 a woman pleaded for exemption from censure because
“English soldiers brought over a piper with them and did dance in her
house.” That, she thought, was sufficient excuse for any shortcomings in
the management of her household.

A.D. 1662.—A Kirkcaldy man, who shot his father in 1662, sought liquor
from an acquaintance to help to wile away his melancholy, and “there
comes a piper, and this wretched man went and did dawnce.” The music
evidently was enough to dispel all the terrors of the law.

A.D. 1700.—About the beginning of the nineteenth century the big drone
was added to the bagpipe, distinguishing it henceforth from the Lowland
and Northumbrian.

A.D. 1741.—On a political occasion in 1741 the Magistrates of Dingwall
were welcomed home by the ringing of bells, “while young and old danced
to the bagpipe, violin, and Jewish harp.” Rather a curious medley they
would make.

A.D. 1745.—Prince Charlie had a large number of pipers with him in his
rebellion of 1745. After the battle of Prestonpans his army marched into
Edinburgh, a hundred pipers playing the Jacobite air, “The King shall
enjoy his ain again:” and when he marched to Carlisle he had with him a
hundred pipers. Perhaps it was because of its prominence in his
rebellion that the bagpipe was afterwards classed by the ruling powers
as an instrument of warfare, the carrying of which deserved punishment.

A.D. 1775.—In this year we find the first reference to a professional
maker of bagpipes. In the _Edinburgh Directory_ for 1775, a book that
could be carried in the vest pocket, “Hugh Robertson” is entered as
“pipe maker, Castle Hill, Edinburgh.” It was this same Hugh Robertson
who made the prize pipes competed for at the meetings inaugurated by the
Highland Society of London some time later, and an instrument of his
make which took first prize at one of the competitions was recently in
the possession of Mr. David Glen, Edinburgh. Where it now is cannot be
discovered, as Mr. Glen parted with it to one of whose whereabouts he is
not aware.

It is not necessary to trace the instrument farther down through the
years. In Scotland, after it overcame the setback of the ’45, it became
more popular year by year until at last in 1824, we find an English
traveller saying that “the Scots are enthusiastic in their love for
their national instrument. In Edinburgh the sound of the bagpipe is to
be heard in every street.” The Lowland, the Northumberland and the Irish
pipes lost favour, and the Lincolnshire—that referred to by Shakespeare—
has been totally extinct since about 1850. The Great Highland Bagpipe is
the only form that has held its own.

The early history of the Celts affords abundant room for controversy,
and the origin of the pipes, their introduction into, or evolution in,
the Highlands, will always be debateable matter. The weight of evidence,
however, goes to show that the pipes and pipe music are far more likely
to have been evolved out of the life of the Highland people than
imported from any other country. The fact that the instrument is not
mentioned in early Scottish history is no proof that it did not exist.
Besides, we have now got away from the habit of trying to find the
origin of things peculiarly Scottish outside of Scotland. It used to be
the fashion to decry everything local to Scotland, and our clans, even,
traced their origin to Norman and Norwegian sources. That time, however,
is past, and now Highlanders pride themselves on an ancestry which,
however far back it is traced, is still Scottish. So with the pipes.
They have been in Scotland from all time, and it is in Scotland that
they have been brought to the highest degree of perfection. The
importation theory will not stand the test of inquiry. If the pipes came
from Norway, or Rome, or any part of the Continent, or even England, how
is it that in these places they have deteriorated almost to the point of
disappearance, while in Scotland they have been continually developing?
Ireland, indeed, can put forward a good claim—Christianity came from
there, the peoples are the same, and the relations between the two
countries in early days were very close—but there is less to uphold the
claim than there is to show that the pipes are native to the Highlands.
They are not mentioned in Ossianic poetry. In these times, however, the
pipes would be so subordinate to the harp that their passing-by by the
poet is a fact of little significance. If the Celts were the original
inhabitants of the Highlands, and can be identified with the Picts—a
theory for which there is very strong argument indeed—there is surely
nothing more likely than that the pipes were always in existence among
the people. Robertson, in his _Historical Proofs of the Highlanders_,
shows clearly that there has never been a radical change of race or
customs in the Highlands, that the music of the Great Highland Bagpipe
has ever been peculiar to the Gael of Alban, and that the Irish Scots
must have learned it from the Caledonian Picts. It is strong presumptive
evidence in favour of his contention that in no other country has the
instrument been developed in the same way, that it is one of the very
few national musical instruments in Europe, and that in no other country
is there such a quantity of peculiar music of such an age, composed
solely for the instrument, and fitted only for interpretation by it.

There is nothing in the music that connects it with any part of the
Continent, or that shows that it was borrowed from any particular place.
The pibroch cannot possibly have come from the Tyrol or Italy, neither
can the reels and other popular melodies. The importation theory grew
out of the ideas entertained of the rude and uncivilised state of
Scotland at an early period, which was considered altogether
incompatible with the delicacy of taste and feeling its poetry and music
displayed. But the student of Highland history soon discovers that, with
all the rudeness, there existed among the people just that delicacy of
taste and feeling which found expression in the music, and he at once
concludes that the music is a real growth of the home soil. The race
were always in the land: why not their language, their music, their
customs, in a more or less rude form?

Passing from debateable ground, the result of our assorting of
quotations seems to be that the first thoroughly authentic reference to
the bagpipe in Scotland dates from 1406, that it was well known in
Reformation times, that the second drone was added about 1500, that it
was first mentioned in connection with the Gaelic in 1506, or a few
years later, that it was classed in a list of Scottish musical
instruments in 1548, that in 1549 and often afterwards it was used in
war, that in 1650 every town had a piper, that in 1700 the big drone was
added, and that in 1824 the Scots were enthusiastic about the pipes.
There is not the slightest doubt, of course, that the instrument was
used in Scotland for many years, probably for centuries, before we can
trace it, but previous to the dates given we have only tradition and
conjecture to go by.

From 1700 till 1750 was perhaps the most critical time in the story of
the Great Highland Bagpipe. The disaster at Culloden nearly spelt ruin
for the pipes as well as for the tartan. The Disarming Act was very
stringent, and the pipes came in for almost as strict a banning as did
the kilt. The Jacobites were outlawed, the tartan was pronounced a mark
of extreme disloyalty to the House of Hanover, and the life of a
professed piper was hardly worth living. The Celt was crushed by the
severity of his defeat and broken by the inrush of innovation that
followed. Clanship, as such, ceased, and the chiefs, from being the
fathers of their people, became the landlords. The Highlander lost his
reckless passions, but he also lost his rude chivalry and his absorbing
love for the old customs. Traditional history and native poetry were
neglected, and theological disputes of interminable duration occupied
much of the time formerly devoted to poetic recitals and social
meetings. Poverty and civilisation did their work; taste for music
declined, and piping died away. Absentee landlordism took the place of
resident chieftainism, and Gaelic seemed likely to become a dead
language, for the people seemed willing to let it die. The destruction
of the crofter system completed the work of ruin begun by the
destruction of the clan system. What this meant for Highland feelings
and customs is vividly shown by the following extract from the writings
of the elder Dr. Norman Macleod, _Caraid nan Gaidheal_, as he was
called. The speaker is “Finlay the Piper.”

  “There, indeed, you are right; he was the man that had a kind heart.
  But this new man that has come in his place has a heart of remarkable
  hardness, and cares not a straw for the pipes or anything that belongs
  to the Highlands. He is a perfect fanatic in his passion for big
  sheep. It brings more enjoyment to him to look at a wether parading on
  green braes than to listen to all the pibrochs that ever were played.
  If I were to compose a pibroch for him, I would call it ‘Lament for
  the Big Wether,’ the wether that fell over the rock the other day, the
  loss of which almost drove him mad. It’s not I that would be caring to
  say this to everybody; but as you happen to be with me on the spot
  there can be no harm in telling you how he treated the poor people
  here. There is not now smoke coming out of single chimney or sheiling
  in the whole glen, where you used to see scores of decent people
  working at honest work. This man would as soon give lodgment to a fox
  as to a poor crofter or a widow woman. You never heard in your life
  what a mangling and maiming he has made of the population of this
  glen. Not even a shepherd would he have from the people of the
  country; he brought them all in from the south. Even his shepherd’s
  dog does not understand a word of Gaelic. Mactalla of the Crag has not
  sent back a single echo since good Donald went away. Everything must
  make way for the sheep. There is not a single brake now in which a
  bramble would grow; no tuft of brushwood on the slope where one could
  gather a nut; he has shaved the country as bare as the gable wall of a
  house, and as for sloes, where sloes used to be you may as well go and
  look for grapes. The birds, too, have left us; they have gone to the
  wood on the other side of the Sound; even the gay cuckoo cannot find a
  single stunted bush where it might hide. He has burnt all the wild
  wood that ran so prettily up the slope from end to end of this
  property. You won’t gather as many sticks from the brushwood as would
  serve to boil a pot of potatoes, or as many twigs as would make a
  fishing basket. But no more of this; it makes my heart sick to think
  of it. Better to be talking of something else.”

The new era dawned, however. The dawn came so slowly that it was hardly
noticed. The rabid anti-Highland feeling died away, the powers that were
took a sensible view of the situation, and in the reaction that followed
the music of the pipes quickly regained its old position of pre-
eminence. With this difference, however—it returned to popularity as a
social instead of a military force, destined in the Highlands to be the
pursuit of the enthusiast and the beloved of the common people, and in
the British army only, the inspiration that leads men on to slay one
another. In this respect the suppression of the rebellions of 1715 and
1745 marks a turning point in Scottish history, the importance of which
has never been recognised. With Culloden ended the influence of old
beliefs, and when, in 1782, the ban of the Disarming Act was removed,
the people were ready for new ideas. A spirit of improvement and an
enthusiasm for things Highland appeared, first modestly, then boldly,
and under the auspices of a renovated society, without the environments
of war and romance, a new order asserted itself. Competitions stirred up
the more clever of the piping fraternity, and further popularised the
music, books on Highland piping, written or compiled by leading pipers,
began to appear, and with the publication broadcast of histories of the
many tunes, the people began to take an intelligent and patriotic
interest in the music. The Highlands is not now a barbarous and unknown
land. It is classic ground, having been made so by the pens of clever
writers, but the old instrument is still the emblem of the homeland to
Highlanders all over the world, and, whatever dies out, many generations
will not see the last of the pibroch.




                              CHAPTER IV.
                         THE MAKE OF THE PIPES.

  There’s meat and music here, as the fox said when he ate the bagpipe.—
  _Gaelic Proverb._

  The “Encyclopædia” definition—The simple reed—Early forms—Simple
    bagpipes—The chorus—The _volynka_—Continental pipes—British pipes—
    The Northumbrian—The Irish—The Highland—Tuning—Modern pipes—Prize
    pipes.

  “A wind instrument whose fixed characteristic has always been two or
  more reed pipes attached to and sounded by a wind chest or bag, which
  bag has in turn been supplied either by the lungs of the performer or
  by a bellows.”


This is the encyclopædia definition, and generally speaking it is
correct. But the bag is certainly an addition to the simple reed or
shepherd’s pipe. And if we wish to go further back we can go to the time
when a schoolboy on his way to school pulled a green straw from the
cornfield, and biting off a bit, trimmed the end and made for himself a
pipe. “Many a pipe,” says J. F. Campbell, “did boys make of straws in
the days of my youth, and much discord did we produce in trying to play
on the slender oaten pipe in emulation of John Piper.” Boys being still
boys, they still pull the green straws in the passing by, and no doubt
if the pipes were not already in existence they would again grow out of
this primitive pipe, slowly but surely. Without the bag the pipe is the
most ancient of all instruments. It was quite natural that people should
try to form sounds by blowing through a tube, and afterwards to vary the
sounds either by varying the size or shape of the tube or by fitting
into it some special mechanism. The pipe was well known to the Trojans,
Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, who had different kinds for different
measures, and from contemporary writings we learn that the strain of
blowing these early pipes was so great that the player had to bandage
his lips and cheeks with a leathern muzzle. One ancient picture
represents a player blowing a triple pipe, that is, three pipes joined
at the mouth-piece, but separate further down, a performance which must
have made the need for some improved method of supplying wind very
obvious. The name of the genius who first thought of having a reserve
supply in a bag attached to the pipes, which would keep an equable
current for the purposes of the music, while at the same time it would
relieve the player’s mouth of the continued strain of blowing, is lost
to posterity, but in all probability the idea was originated at
different places and at different times by different people. Mac Lean,
in his _History of the Celtic Language_, considers the bagpipe as
originally consisting of a bladder with drones and chanter of reeds and
bulrushes, and affirms that he himself made and played on such an
instrument. The first real bagpipe would, however, be a skin, most
likely that of a goat or kid, and the invention of the valve in the
mouth-piece would follow as a matter of course—that is, if the man who
thought of the bag did not also think of having a bellows. There were,
no drones in the early pipes. St. Jerome, who lived in the fifth
century, says that at the synagogue, in ancient times there was a simple
species of bagpipe, consisting of a skin or leather bag, with two pipes,
through one of which the bag was inflated, the other emitting the sound.
This was the first real bagpipe and it was also, it may be added, the
germ of the organ, for the bagpipe is but the organ reduced to its
simplest expression.

[Illustration:

  OLD GERMAN WIND INSTRUMENTS—A.D. 1619.

  (1) _Large Bagpipe._ (2) _Dudey or Hornpipe._ (3) _Shepherd’s Pipe._
    (4) _Bagpipe
  with Bellows._
]

There was an ancient instrument, called the chorus, which seems to have
been closely related to the bagpipe. The chorus was composed of the skin
of an animal, which was inflated by a pipe in the back of the neck, and
had another pipe issuing from the mouth. That it was not exactly the
same as the bagpipe is evident from the fact that it was called _alterum
genus cori_ to distinguish it from the instrument composed of a bag
specially manufactured with mouth-piece and pipe, which was known as
_unum genus cori_. Giraldus Cambrensis, one of the most authoritative
writers of the twelfth century, assigns the chorus to Scotland, but says
nothing of its construction, although he credits the country with
superior musical skill. Some ancient writers class the chorus with
stringed instruments, and assert that it has no connection whatever with
the bagpipe. Living as we do at the beginning of the twentieth century,
we cannot possibly decide such a delicate point. And it does not matter
much that we cannot.

Those who hold that the instrument was originally imported into Scotland
believe that the parent of the Scottish bagpipe was an instrument known
as the _volynka_, found in some provinces of the Russian Empire and
ascribed more particularly to the Finns, who called it _pilai_. It was a
rude instrument, consisting of two tubes and a mouth-piece, all apart,
inserted in a raw, hairy goatskin. It was not held in high esteem, for
when the Czar degraded the Archbishop of Novogorod in 1569 he alleged
that the worthy father was “fitter for a bagpiper leading dancing bears
than for a prelate.” But no less than five different kinds of bagpipes
were known on the Continent in the seventeenth century, some of them
with very high qualities as musical instruments. They were:—

  I. The _cornemuse_, a simple instrument inflated by the mouth, with a
  chanter having eight apertures for notes, but without any drones.

  II. The _chalemie_, or shepherd’s pipe, used by peasants at festivals,
  and also in country churches. It was inflated by the mouth, had a
  chanter with ten holes, and had also two drones.

  III. The _mussette_, which was inflated by a bellows. It had a chanter
  with twelve notes, besides other apertures and valves opened by keys,
  and with four reeds for drones, enclosed in a barrel. It was a
  complicated instrument, and elaborately made. In one instance, we
  read, the bag of the _mussette_ was made of velvet embroidered with
  _fleurs de lis_. It was, however, the “class” variety of the bagpipe,
  and was played before Royalty. The _mussette_ was said to sound most
  sweetly, “especially in the hands of Destouches, the Royal Piper.” So
  they had a royal piper in those days and the pipes were honoured.

  IV. The _surdelina_ of Naples, an instrument with two drones, two
  chanters, and numerous keys.

  V. The Italian peasant’s bagpipe, having two chanters, each with a
  single key, and one drone.

In Germany the instrument was known as the _sackpfeife_, in Italy as the
_cornamusa_, in Rome as _tibia utricularis_, in Lower Brittany as
_bignou_, and other Continental names for it were _tiva_, _ciarmella_,
_samponia_ or _samphoneja_ and _zampugna_.

There was besides the simple combination of reed and bladder, so simple
that it could be made by the shepherd boy himself, without the aid of
tools and without any special aptitude for mechanics. From it spring all
the others which demand the skill of the finished artisan and the help
of turning laths and latter-day implements. The Italian bagpipe, which
was made familiar in Britain through the wandering _pifferari_, was a
very rude instrument, consisting of a goat’s skin, with an enormous
drone, on which the player performed by means of a mouth tube, another
player making the melody on a separate chanter. A visitor to Naples in
1824 describes a musician in a sheepskin coat, with the wool outwards,
playing a bagpipe, of which the bag consisted of “the undressed skin of
a goat inflated by one of the legs in its original shape.” How anything
could be inflated by the leg of a goat he does not stop to inform us,
but as the bagpipe now used in Italy is very agreeable and also
presentable, though limited in power, it must have been improved
considerably since 1824. That it did exist in a more finished condition
is evident from the statement of another traveller, made in 1850, that
he had heard the national music of Hungary played at Pesth on the
_dudelsack_, “a genuine bagpipe, with a fine drone, adorned in front
with a goat’s head, and covered with a goat’s skin.” It is not clear
whether he means that the bag or the drone was adorned in front with the
goat’s head, but most likely it was the bag, and the head would be in
its original relation to the skin of the goat. The _sackpfeife_
(bagpipe) and _chalemie_ (shepherd’s pipe) seem to have been intimately
associated with the wandering minstrels of Germany from time immemorial,
and under the name of _dudey_ or _dudelsack_, is still well known to the
German peasant.

There are three recognised kinds of bagpipes in the British Islands:—

I. The Northumbrian bagpipe.

II. The Irish bagpipe.

III. The Great Highland Bagpipe.

The Northumbrian bagpipe is in two forms, one like the Highland, but of
smaller dimensions and milder tone, and the other a miniature of this,
and having the same relation to it as a fife has to a German band. The
Lowland bagpipe of Scotland may be identified with the Northumbrian, but
it is looked on rather contemptuously by the devotees of the Highland,
because, in their opinion, it merely imitates other instruments, and is
not fitted to perform what they consider the perfection of pipe music—
the pibroch.

[Illustration:

  THE NORTHUMBRIAN BAGPIPE
]

The Northumbrian and the Lowland pipes were easily carried about, and
were much gentler than the great Highland, but they did not resemble
those used on the Continent. They had the same tone as the Highland, but
were less sonorous, and were blown by a bellows put in motion by the arm
opposite to that under which the bag was held. In this latter respect
they were similar to the Irish, and like them they had the drones fixed
in one stock and laid horizontally over the arm, not borne on the
shoulder. The real Lowland bagpipe, however, never got farther than two
drones. A new form of the Northumbrian was played until very lately,
perhaps still is. It also was a bellows instrument, and had several keys
on the chanter, which gave it a chromatic scale. A peculiarity of its
fingering was that only one hole was uncovered at a time, the end of the
chanter being kept shut. Although the Great Highland Bagpipe has now
surpassed the Lowland, the latter is not quite extinct, and a few years
ago there were, even in Aberdeenshire, at least two performers on it. In
the Borders of Scotland there were probably many more. The Northumbrian
pipes, it may be added, were often wholly formed of ivory, and richly
ornamented with silver. The bag was covered with cloth or tartan, and
fringed or otherwise adorned. The compass of the old Northumbrian small
pipe chanter was only of eight notes (one less than that of the
Highland); but with a few keys to produce semi-tones, all the old
Northumbrian airs could be played. The modern chanter has been
lengthened by the addition of keys until the scale extends from D below
the treble clef to B above it.

[Illustration:

  IRISH BAGPIPE.
]

The Irish bagpipe is the instrument in its most elaborate form. It also
is supplied with wind by a bellows. The drones are all fixed on one
stock, and have keys which are played by the wrist of the right hand.
The reeds are soft and the tones very sweet and melodious, and there is
a harmonious bass which is very effective in the hands of a good player.
Some of the drones are of great length, winding as many as three times
the length of the apparent tube. The player is seated with one side of
the bellows tied firmly to his body, the other to his right arm, the
drones under his left leg, and the end of the chanter resting on a pad
of leather on his knee, on which it is tipped for the purpose of
articulating many of the notes. The bag is made of goat’s skin and is
rendered pliable by means of bees’ wax and butter. Originally it, like
that of the Highland pipe, was filled by the mouth, but it was changed
so as to be filled by the bellows. In later instruments several finger
keys were adapted to a fourth tube, whereby a perfect chord could be
produced, and thus the instrument was rendered fit for private
apartments, where as the Highland and the Lowland were only suitable for
the open air. The sweetness of the sound, the result of the smallness
and delicacy of the reeds and the prolongation of the pipes; the
capacity of the instrument, the result of the many keys, and the
capability of the chanter; have earned for the Irish pipes the title of
the Irish organ. The compass of the instrument is two octaves. Like the
Lowland, the Irish bagpipe is fast dying out, but there is in Glasgow at
least one player, an old man, bent with years, but devoted to his pipes,
who takes his stand near the top of the classic High Street, and can
always depend on a small but select audience, to appreciate his
rendering of Scotch and Irish airs on the bagpipe of Erin. Both the
Irish and the Northumbrian pipes have, it may be added, been elaborated
until they have almost ceased to be bagpipes.

And lastly, we have the “Great Highland Bagpipe.” In this instrument a
valved tube leads from the mouth to an air-tight bag which has four
other orifices, three large enough to contain the base of three fixed
long tubes termed drones, and another smaller, to which is fitted the
chanter. The three are thrown on the shoulder while the latter is held
in the hands. All four pipes are fitted with reeds, but of different
kinds. The drone reeds are made by splitting a round length of “cane” or
reed backward from a cross cut near a knot or joint towards the open
end. They thus somewhat resemble the reed in organ pipes, the loose flap
of cane replacing the tongue, and the uncut part the tube or reed
proper. They are set downward in a chamber at the base of the drone, so
that the current of air issuing from the bag tends to set the tongue in
vibration. The drone reeds are only intended to produce a single note,
which can be tuned by a “slider” on the pipe itself, varying the length
of the consonating air column.

The chanter reed is different in form, being made of two approximated
edges of cane tied on to a metal tube. It is thus essentially a double
reed, like that of the oboe or bassoon, while the drone reed roughly
represents the single beating reed of the organ or clarionet. The drone
reed is an exact reproduction of the “squeaker” which children in the
fields fashion out of joints of tall grass, probably the oldest form of
this reed in existence.

The drones are in length proportional to their note, the longest being
about three feet high. The chanter is a conical wooden tube, about
fourteen inches long, pierced with eight sounding holes, seven in front
for the fingers and one at the top behind for the thumb of the right
hand. Two additional holes bored across the tube below the lowest of
these merely regulate the pitch, and are never stopped; were it not for
them, however, the chanter would require to be some inches shorter, and
would consequently have a less pleasing appearance.

[Illustration:

  THE GREAT HIGHLAND BAGPIPE
]

The two smaller drones produce a note in unison with the lowest A of the
chanter, and the larger an octave lower. The indescribable thrill which
the bagpipe is capable of imparting is produced by a sudden movement of
the fingers on certain notes, which gives an expression peculiar to the
pipes, and distinguishes the pibroch from all other music. The drones,
as has been said, are tuned by means of “sliders” or movable joints, and
this tuning, or preparation for playing, which generally occupies a few
minutes of the piper’s time before he begins the tune proper, is heard
with impatience by those not accustomed to the instrument. It gave rise
to the saying, applied to those who waste time over small matters, “You
are longer in tuning your pipes than playing your tune.” It cannot,
however, be helped so long as this instrument remains exactly as it is.
The piper’s warm breath goes almost directly on to the reeds, and the
consequence is that no sooner does he get his pipes in tune than he
starts to put them out of tune—by blowing into them. What is needed is
some contrivance that will prevent this, by cooling the air before it
reaches the chanter. There are several contrivances in use among leading
players, each generally the invention of the man who uses it, but none
has come into general favour. Highlanders are a conservative race, and
they are not willing to make any changes on their much-loved instrument.
It would, however, be well if they would take this matter into
consideration, and do something to render unnecessary that preparatory
tuning which many people find so unpleasant—that is if it is possible to
prevent the reeds getting wet while wet breath is blown into the
instrument. The bellows of course gets over the difficulty, but we
hardly wish to see a bellows attached to the Highland Bagpipe. It would
not then be Highland.

The Highland bagpipe is louder and more shrill than any other, probably
because it was all along intended for use as an instrument of war, and
pipe music is known to have been heard at a distance of six miles, and,
under specially favourable circumstances, of ten miles. The Duke of
Sutherland has a bagpipe which was played on in the ’45, and could be
heard at a distance of eight miles.

Modern pipes are generally made of black ebony or cocoawood, the
ferrules or rings being of ivory. Sometimes the pipes are half-mounted
in silver, that is the high ferrules in ivory and the low in silver. The
drones of the best makers have the inside lined with metal, where there
is friction in the tuning slide. The bag is formed of sheepskin, in
which are securely fastened five pieces of turned wood called stocks.
These receive the ends of the chanter, the mouth-piece, and the drones.
The chanter reed is formed of two pieces of Spanish cane, placed side by
side. The tops of these are worked down to a fine edge, and the bottoms
are tied with fine hemp to a small metal tube. The blowpipe has on its
lower end a valve, which prevents the return of the wind to the mouth.
The drones provide a background or additional volume of sound, which
gives body to the music. The big drone is fitted with two, and the
others with one tuning slide each. The drones are interchangeable, so
that the big drone can be placed in the right or left stock to suit a
right or left-handed player. When the bag is filled with wind the
pressure of the player’s arm must be so regulated that there is always
just sufficient force of air to bring out the notes clearly without
interfering with the steady action of the drones. The bag is held well
under the arm, the big drone rests on the shoulders, and the others are
suspended from it by ribbons and silk cords. The bag is generally held
slightly in front, so that the short drones rest on the shoulder. When
on full-dress parade a banner flies from the big drone, with the arms of
the regiment or chief as a motto. The drones are generally placed on the
left shoulder, but many players place them on the right. The whole
instrument is kept in position by the tension of the bag. The
instruments used by present-day pipers are the full set, the halfset or
reel pipes, and the practising chanter.

The bagpipe had originally but one drone. A second was added about 1500,
and a third about 1800. Bagpipes with one drone are still used
occasionally, and so late as the winter of 1899 an itinerant player
might sometimes be seen, late at night, playing for coppers at Jamaica
Street corner, Glasgow, on such an instrument. The two drone pipes were
barred at competitions owing to some supposed advantage they gave to the
player, and they appeared last in 1821.

The pipes awarded as prizes at competitions under the auspices of the
Highland Society of London are almost always of cocoa wood, having
armorial bearings and a silver plate inscribed with the name of the
successful competitor. The bagpipe is the result of an evolution
process, and if this process continues we may yet see it further
improved, and the instrument made so that it will commend itself not
only to Highlanders themselves, but to lovers of music generally. A
great deal of the prejudice against the pipes is, however, caused by the
ignorance of their critics, and perhaps if people criticised less and
understood more we would not hear so much of the shortcomings of the
instrument.




                               CHAPTER V.
                       WITH AN EAR TO THE DRONE.

                “What needs there be sae great a fraise
                Wi’ dringing, dull, Italian lays;
                I wadna gie our ain strathspeys
                For half a hunder score o’ them;
                They’re dowf and dowie at the best,
                Dowf and dowie, dowf and dowie,
                Dowf and dowie at the best,
                [Wi’ a’ their variorum;]
                [They’re dowf and dowie at the best,]
                Their _allegros_ an’ a’ the rest.
                They canna please a Scottish taste
                Compared with Tullochgorum.”

  Dr. Johnson—Inspiration of Scottish music—Professor Blackie—Highland
    music simple—Scottish airs once Highland—Age of Highland music—
    Capability of the bagpipe—How it has suffered—Peculiarities of the
    pibroch—Pipe music not fitted for inside—How it troubled the
    pressman—Chevalier Neukomm—Professor Blackie again—A Chicago jury’s
    opinion—An ode to the pipes.


Dr. Johnson, who was in several ways a bundle of contradictions, found
at least one thing in Scotland that he enjoyed. When on his tour through
the Hebrides, he was on various occasions entertained by the bagpipe
music of his host’s piper, and he liked nothing better than to stand
behind the performer and hold the big drone close to his ear while the
instrument was in full blast. He was not so affected as some of his
country men and women nowadays, who say the sound of the drone is
unpleasant, forgetting, or ignorant of, the fact that it is simply the
bass A of their fine church organs sounded continuously by a reed on a
wind instrument. But to them the organ is refined and represents
culture, while the bagpipe is the barbarous instrument of a barbarous
people, whose chief end is to act as custodians of a part of the country
that provides good sport after the Twelfth, but is best forgotten all
the rest of the year. So they scoff at the national music and the
national instrument of Scotland, with the spirit of prejudice, half
affected, half real, which induces John Bull to deny his neighbour north
of the Tweed the possession of any good thing. And besides, as Gilbert
says:—

             “A Sassenach chief may be bonnily built,
             Wear a sporran, a hose (!) a dirk and a kilt;
             He may in fact stride in an acre of stripes,
             But he cannot assume an affection for pipes.”

The Scots were always a musical people. Their national airs, if nothing
else, prove this. But music to Scotsmen, still more to Highlanders, was
always more than music; it was something which inspired and intensified
all their thoughts, and, combined with the impassioned lays of the
bards, was to them their principal intellectual food. The bards, whether
leading their countrymen with naked bodies and bared broadswords,
against their foes, or reciting in the festive hall, endeavoured by
means of the choicest language, wedded to the tenderest and boldest
music, to impart to their listeners all that was noble and heroic. With
harp and voice they poured forth music and words that stirred the very
depths of courage and fervour in the enthusiastic nature of the Gaels.
And the music which they composed was, like the people, rugged but
whole-hearted, “the music of the great bens, the mysterious valleys, and
of deep crying unto deep,” a music which showed that the people who
could live on it were not a people of sordid and sensual tastes, but a
people who were by nature and circumstances fitted to appreciate the
grand, the awe-inspiring, and the true. They traversed daily a country
of the wildest and most diversified scenery, mountains and forests and
lochs, their minds partook of the sublimity of their surroundings; they
mused continually with glowing imagination on the deeds of their
forefathers and their own exploits, and the music to whose rhythm they
were bred was but the reflex of their character and life. “That is what
makes all your Celtic music so good,” wrote Professor Blackie. “It is
all so real; not tricked up for show, but growing out of a living root.”

Highland music was always different from Lowland, in that it was based
largely on memories of the past, and connected by undying tradition with
events that had left their impress on the country or the clan. It was
always simple and unaffected, and the Highlander always preferred the
simple strains of his countrywomen and the grandeur of the pipes in
their native glens to the finest opera. Besides he liked variety, as the
existence of marches, pibrochs, quicksteps, laments, reels, jigs, and
strathspeys testify, and he was equally at home with the grave, the gay,
or the melancholy. The melancholy, however, was the predominating note.
One can recognise a Gaelic air among a thousand. Quaint and pathetic, it
moves on with the most singular intervals, the movement self-contained
and impressive, especially to the Celt.

Scottish music as it now exists has been derived largely from the
Highlands. No man did more to acclimatise Celtic music in the Lowlands
than Burns. By wedding Highland airs to his own incomparable poetry he
gave them a new lease of life, albeit he helped to destroy them under
their old names while preserving them under the new. The music of “Scots
Wha Hae,” “Boy’s Wife,” “Auld Lang Syne,” “Of a’ the Airts,” and “Ye
Banks and Braes,” has no counterpart across the Border or among the
Saxon race. It is the ancient inheritance of the Celt, made national by
the genius of a national poet.

The age of Highland music is another guarantee of its excellence. It has
stood the test of time, the severest of all ordeals. We have not much
English poetry which can, with any certainty, be ascribed to a date
earlier than the time of Chaucer, but the Scots were celebrated for
musical genius since the beginning of history, genius which, an early
historian says, could not be found elsewhere on this side of the Alps.
We have, for instance, a “Song of the Druids,” though, to tell the
truth, we cannot prove its Druidical origin; we have “Somerled’s
Lament,” composed on an event which took place in 1164, though not
necessarily at that date; we have a piece of pipe music composed in the
middle of the battle of Inverlochy in 1427; the “Rout of Glenfruin,”
which refers to a desperate engagement between the Mac Gregors and the
Colquhouns in 1602; and a “March to the Battle of Inverlochy,” and “The
Clans’ Gathering;” both composed on the battle fought at Inverlochy in
1645. These do not prove that the pipes themselves were capable at that
time of rendering such music, but they prove that the music existed.
There are some pipe tunes—_Cogadh na Sith_ and _A Ghlas Mheur_—for
instance, so ancient that their origin cannot be traced, but they have,
by means of their own merits, and in spite of the want of the printing
press, lived all through the centuries. In the beginning of the twelfth
century, Giraldus Cambrensis said of the music of the Irish Celts that
it was above that of any nation he had ever known, and in the opinion of
many, Scotland at that time far surpassed Ireland, even while her people
were sunk in misery and barbarism.

As to the question whether people of good musical taste can appreciate
the music of the great Highland bagpipe, it is a fact that people who
have the keenest appreciation and intense enjoyment of the music of such
composers as Mozart and Handel, of the great singers and great
musicians, can at the same time enjoy a pibroch or a strathspey when
played by a master hand. Mendelssohn on his visit to the Highlands was
favourably impressed by the pibroch, and introduced a portion into one
of his finest compositions. The pibrochs are remarkable productions; all
the more remarkable that they were composed by men who, we may safely
assume, were of an humble class, and not blessed in any way with the
advantages of education—least of all with those of a musical education.

The great Highland bagpipe is not fitted for executing all kinds, or
even many kinds of music. Its compass is only nine notes, from G second
time treble clef to A, first ledger line above clef. The scale may be
called a “tempered” one. The C note being slightly flattened admits of a
greater variety of keys than could otherwise be used, and for its own
purposes the scale is perfect. The notes are G natural, A, B, C, D, E, F
sharp, G natural, and A. It is this G natural, or flat seventh, which
gives the scale its peculiar character. The A is that of any other
instrument in concert pitch. The so-called imperfection of scale,
together with the somewhat harsh tone, is the cause of the unpleasant
effect on the accurately sensitive ears of those accustomed to music in
the natural diatonic scale, but these also account for the semi-
barbarous, exciting stimulus the instrument exercises on the minds of
Highlanders, especially on the battlefield. The chanter of the Highland
bagpipe has an oboe or bassoon reed broader than that of the other
kinds, whence that loudness of sound for which it is known. This is a
valuable quality in a military instrument, and when heard at a
sufficient distance, when the faults of scale are not so noticeable, the
music is very agreeable. Besides, compass and variety are not always the
highest qualities of music, and, although the chanter of a bagpipe is
almost devoid of expression and beyond the performer’s control, the
suitable execution of simple airs is equally practicable, and of equal
value with music obtained from other instruments. Simple airs may be
performed on simple instruments, and a master hand can bring from
imperfect materials results better than those produced by the amateur
with materials of the highest class. But we should not expect from one
instrument the music proper to another, or blame the one because it
fails to please those who are used to the other. The bagpipes have all
along been subject to the criticism of the stranger, who knew neither
them nor their people, but who came to criticise and went away to scoff,
not remembering that a Highlander suddenly imported into a London
drawing-room would have as poor an opinion of the music there as the
Londoner has of his. They have suffered too from the well-meaning
efforts of their friends. Some have invented contrivances and
modifications for bringing the instrument nearer to all-round music.
Others have adapted for the pipes pieces never intended for them, and
which only show up their deficiencies, in the hope of bringing the music
nearer to the pipes. Neither has succeeded to any great extent, and
neither is likely to succeed. The Mac Crimmons of Skye, the greatest
masters of the bagpipe, never violated the principle of using only music
specially composed, and they succeeded beyond all others in
demonstrating the powers of the instrument. Those who have since
departed from their principle have failed to justify the departure, but
they have proved, what they might have known before they began, that an
instrument cannot produce what it is not constructed to produce. The
Highland bagpipe is the exponent of Highland music, and of that only.

And there is enough and to spare without invading the realms of other
instruments. There are reels, strathpeys, and marches out of number, and
there are, above all things, pibrochs, or, to give the proper spelling,
_piobaireachd_ (“pibroch” is simply an attempt made by Sir Walter Scott
to spell the word phonetically, so as to make it pronounceable to his
south country readers; but it has come into such general use that its
correctness passes unquestioned.)[3] The word does not, properly
speaking, denote any class of tune—it means pipe-playing—but it is
generally applied to a class which in itself includes three classes—the
_cruinneachadh_ or gathering, the _cumhadh_ or lament, and the _failte_
or salute. The pibroch has been called the voice of uproar and misrule,
and its music that of real nature and rude passion. It is the great
specialty of the Highland bagpipe, and no piper is considered a real
expert unless he is a good pibroch player. It is the most elaborate of
the compositions devised for the pipes, and is difficult to define
otherwise than as a theme with variations. Dr. Mac Culloch, a rather
cynical traveller, who wrote books on Scotland in 1824, which still pass
as standard, considered it “of an extremely irregular character,
containing a determined melody, whereon, such as it is, are engrafted a
series of variations rising in difficulty of execution, but presenting
no character, as they consist of commonplace, tasteless flourishes,
offensive to the ear by their excess, and adding to the original
confusion instead of embellishing the air which the ground may possess.”
“It has,” he adds, “neither time, rhythm, melody, cadence, nor accent,
neither keynote nor commencement nor termination, and it can therefore
regulate nothing. It begins, goes on, and ends, no one knows when or how
or where, and if all the merit of the bagpipe is to depend on its
martial, or rather its marching, utility, it could not stand on a worse
foundation.” But Dr. Mac Culloch, strangely enough, himself says a
little later:—

Footnote 3:

  The proper name of “classic” pipe music in the Gaelic is _Ceol Mor_,
  the Great Music, a word which includes gatherings, laments, and
  salutes.

  “The proper music of the bagpipe is well worthy of the instrument.
  They are really fit for each other, and ought never to have been
  separated. The instrument has suffered in reputation, like the ass in
  the fable, from making too high flights. It is, properly speaking, a
  military weapon (_sic_), and the pibroch is its real business.”

A pibroch is generally in triple or quadruple time, although many are in
two-fourth and six-eighth time. It begins with the _urlar_ or groundwork
of the composition and its doubling. Then comes the high A or thumb
variation, after which the music proceeds:—

    (1) _Siubhal_,              with its   doubling  and trebling.
    (2) _Leum-luath_,             Do.              Do.           Do.
    (3) _Taor-luath_,             Do.              Do.           Do.
    (4) _Taor-luath fosgailte_,   Do.              Do.           Do.
    (5) _Taor-luath breabach_,    Do.              Do.           Do.
    (6) _Taor-luath a mach_,      Do.              Do.           Do.
    (7) _Crun-luath_,             Do.              Do.           Do.
    (8) _Crun-luath fosgailte_,   Do.              Do.           Do.
    (9) _Crun-luath breabach_,    Do.              Do.           Do.
   (10) _Crun-luath a mach_,      Do.              Do.           Do.

It is finished up with the ground or _urlar_ as at the beginning.

The pibroch is not a mere voluntary, played as the taste of the
performer may dictate, though it seems so to those unacquainted with the
nature of the music, especially when the player is inexperienced. All,
however, are not so ignorant or confused as the listener of a story told
by the late Duke of Gordon. A piper in a North of England town had
played a pibroch which wonderfully excited the attention of his hearers,
who seemed equally astonished at its length and the wildness and
apparent disconnection of its parts. Unable to understand it, one of the
spectators at the conclusion anxiously asked the piper to “play it in
English.”

The pibroch is properly a “pipe tune,” and its most legitimate form is
the “gathering.” The gathering is a long piece of music composed on the
occasion of some victory or other fortunate circumstance in the history
of a clan, which, when played, is a warning to the troops to turn out.
The lament and salute originated in a similar way, but should be used on
specific occasions only. The three classes are now, however, treated as
one, propriety being frequently so much discarded that the pieces are
called marches, an entirely unwarranted change, considering the nature
of the music. The bagpipe has its military music mostly composed for
itself, and generally employed by regimental pipers for marching
purposes, and there is no necessity either for using pibrochs as marches
or for adapting for regimental purposes the music of other instruments
as has been done to far too large an extent.

Bagpipe music has also suffered greatly in popular estimation through
the efforts of well-meaning but mistaken people to lift it out of its
proper place and graft it on to city life and inside entertainments. It
is not pleasant chamber music even to Highland ears unless played on
chamber pipes. There are times and circumstances for everything, and
there are few pleasures that will admit of being transplanted out of
their own sphere. The “Haughs o’ Cromdale” was a grand thing at Dargai,
and a sonata by Paderewski is all right before a fashionable audience in
a big city, but to exchange them would only make both ridiculous. The
old pipers could indeed so regulate their instruments as to make the
music almost as sweet as that of the violin, but sweetness is not the
outstanding feature of the bagpipe, and it is not fitted for private
houses or any but the biggest of public halls. The hills themselves are
its appropriate concert room, and among them it pervades the whole
atmosphere, and becomes part of the air until one can hardly tell whence
it comes. It makes rhythm with the breeze and chimes in with the rush of
the torrent, and becomes part of the world in which it is produced. It
suits the bare heath, the solitary cairn, the dark pass, the silent
glen, and the mountain shrouded in mists as no music ever did or can do,
and it is at its best floating across the silent loch or over the
mountain stream, or round the rugged hillsides. It is a military and an
outdoor instrument, and there is no justification for comparing pipe
music with classical productions. It is like comparing taties and
herring with wine jellies, or hoddin’ grey with broad cloth.

Playing within doors is a Lowland and English custom. In the Highlands
the piper was always in the open air, and when people wished to dance to
his music, it was on the green they danced. The pipe was no more
intended for inside than are firearms. A broadside from a man-of-war has
a fine effect when heard at a proper distance, but one would not care to
be sitting by the muzzles when the guns went off. That the large pipes
are still used in halls for entertainment purposes is accounted for by
the strength of association, as much as by their appropriateness.
Highlanders would not consider a gathering at all complete unless they
had their pipers present—a feeling which is easily understood, and which
no one wishes to see die out. But that does not alter the fact that, in
a small apartment at any rate, they are entirely out of place. The
writer is not likely soon to forget one experience of his own, which
helped to confirm him in this opinion. It was in one of the big Glasgow
halls at a Highland gathering, where I was, in a professional capacity,
doing a “special” of several columns for a Highland paper. To catch that
week’s issue, my “copy” had to be posted before I slept, so, as soon as
the chairman had finished his speech, I adjourned to one of the very
small rooms behind the platform to “write up” while the musical part of
the programme proceeded, expecting to be pretty well through before the
turn of the next speaker came. But the “association pipers” were there
before me, and what must they do but shut all the doors to keep the
sound from reaching the platform, and start practising the marches and
reels they were to play later on, marching from end to end of the little
apartment. In five minutes the big drone seemed to be vibrating all
through my anatomy, while the melody danced to its own time among the
crevices of my brain. It was impossible for me to take my fingers out of
my ears—a position which did not lend itself to rapid writing or careful
composition. But the pipers did not think anything about it (they had in
fact stopped conversation and started playing because they “did not wish
to disturb me”), and I soon made an excuse to go out. I tried the
artistes’ room, but the soprano was doing up her hair, the comic man was
arranging his somewhat scanty habilaments, the old violinist was telling
funny stories, and I seemed so obviously out of place that I could not
possibly start working. Next I tried the stair, but the draught was too
much for me. Then I tried the concert hall itself, but the applause was
so frequent that the desks were always rattling. So I came back to the
pipers, and braved it out for half an hour, after which I went back to
the concert hall and did it on my knee. Anything more indescribably
disagreeable than that half-hour in the ante-room it is difficult to
imagine, and there seems, when I think of it now, to have been no
relation whatever between that “music” and the harmonies which used to
float across the bay in the days long ago, when the piper at the big
house tuned his pipes and played to the gentry as they sat at dinner,
the while we boys lay prone on the grass and drank in all the twirling
of his notes. But in the one case there was a mile of sea between and
rocks and fields around, and a blue sky above. In the other, I seemed to
be caged in with some mad thing that hammered at every panel for
freedom.

It was the Chevalier Neukomm, a very distinguished musician, who said,
when asked for his opinion, “I don’t despise your pibrochs; they have in
them the stirrings of rude, but strong, nature. When you traverse a
Highland glen, you must not expect the breath of roses. You must be
contented with the smell of heath. In like manner Highland music has its
rude, wild charms.”

And our own Professor Blackie puts it even better when he says:—

  “The gay ribboned bagpipes moaning away in melancholy coronachs, or
  rattling like hailstones to the clash of claymores on the backs of the
  fleeing Sassenachs. In this case at least—

             ‘’Tis distance lends enchantment to the sound.’

  On this point no Highlander of good taste will disagree with you. The
  bagpipes belong to the open air as naturally as heather belongs to the
  hills and salmon to the sea-lochs. Men do not mend pens with Lochaber
  axes, or employ scene painters to decorate the lids of snuff-boxes.”

As to the man who practises the ordinary pipes in an ordinary city
apartment, with but the thickness of a brick dividing him from
neighbours on either side, he is the worst enemy of his craft and worthy
of all execration. The wise enthusiast will get a smaller set made for
home use, having the lower part of each drone and the top of the chanter
turned large enough to fit the stocks of the full-size pipes, so that
one bag and the stocks in it does for both sets. These will not sound so
loud as to disturb neighbours, and the performer can enjoy himself as
well as with pipes of full size. It must have been of neighbours of a
player on the large pipes that the Chicago jury was composed which tried
an action for damages in 1899. A Scottish society was parading the
streets to the martial skirl of the pipes, when they met a horseman,
whose horse took fright and bolted, throwing the rider through a shop
window. The subsequent action turned on the question of whether or not
the pipes were musical instruments, and the jury decided that they were
not. After which it may be well to conclude with the following verses by
Mr. Patrick Mac Pherson, New York, contributed to the _Celtic Monthly_,
always remembering the open air and giving allowance for the poet’s
license:—

             “Away with your fiddles and flutes,
               As music for wedding or ball,
             Pianofortes, clarionettes, lutes—
               The bagpipe surpasses them all.

             “For polkas, the waltz, the quadrille,
               There’s nought with the pipes can compare;
             An anchorite torpid ’twould thrill,
               Such glorious sounds in the air.

             “So tuneful, harmonious, and sweet!
               The very perfection of art,
             Lends wings to the tardiest feet,
               And joy to the sorrowing heart.

             “Upheaved, the fair dancers would feel
               Like birds, poising light on the wing,
             As nimbly they trip in the reel,
               And roll off the steps of the fling.

             “No requiems grand I assail,
               Like Handel’s Dead March, played in ‘Saul,’
             But yet I maintain that the Gael
               In coronachs vanquishes all.

             “In music, in warfare, in song—
               With bagpipes and banners unfurled,
             Like a torrid simoom borne along,
               The Highlanders lighten the world.”




                              CHAPTER VI.
                      THE “LANGUAGE” OF THE PIPES.

                 “Wild as the desert stream they flow,
                   Wandering along it’s mazy bed;
                 Now scarcely moving, deep and slow,
                   Now in a swifter current led,
                 And now along the level lawn
                 With charming murmurs softly drawn.”

  Have the pipes a language?—A wild, fanciful notion—How it got a hold—
    How much of it is true?—The reed actually speaking—A powerful
    influence—The power of association—Neil Munro—Descriptive Highland
    airs—_A Cholla mo run_—Military stories—In South Africa—An
    enthusiastic war correspondent.


In this chapter we would walk warily, knowing that we are on dangerous
ground. The question is, Has the bagpipe a language more than any other
instrument? Can it speak to the heart of the Highlander more than any
other instrument can speak to hearts that know it, and the music which
it discourses, and the associations of that music? Through the great
bulk of what has been written about the bagpipe there runs this idea of
its power, this wild, fanciful notion that it has an actual language and
that those who understand that language can converse by its means. Some
have even attempted to analyse the music, and to discover the alleged
secret, while others have held that _canntaireachd_, fully dealt with in
the next chapter, was in reality a language and not merely a very rude
system of musical notation. And this notion of the speaking power of the
pipes got such a hold on the imaginative people of the Highlands that,
although personally each of them did not understand how the thing was
possible, many of them accepted it as truth and believed the stories
illustrating the subject, which ultimately became part of their
traditional literature. It seems like sacrilege to disturb the ideas
which have been accepted as absolute truth for centuries, but there is
no doubt whatever that of the speaking power of the pipes about seventy-
five per cent. exists in the vivid imaginations of the retailers of
Highland tradition. It was indeed in the chanter-reed of the pipes that,
after a long search, and after great difficulties, Baron von Kempelen, a
distinguished Continental mechanic and musician, discovered the nearest
approach to the human voice. He believed it was possible to get an
approximation of language by some mechanical contrivance, and he was
able to convert the reed to the elements of a speaking machine, and
through its aid and with many appliances he obtained letters, syllables,
words, and even entire sentences. But all the same, the bagpipe cannot
speak any more than it can fly. If it has ever in all its history
conveyed, by means of an extemporised tune, information to people at a
distance definite enough to enable them to alter all their battle
tactics, we require better historical proof of the incident than is to
be got of any of the stories to be given here.

While, as a simple matter of fact, it is true that the bagpipe cannot
speak, it is equally true that its music exercises a strangely powerful
influence over the Celtic mind. The race are, or at any rate were, of a
peculiarly imaginative temperament. This, taken along with the fact that
their music always had strong associations, explains a great deal. Many
of the pibrochs were composed without premeditation, under the influence
of exuberant joy or the wildest sorrow or despair. Consequently, when,
under favourable circumstances, they were again played by master hands,
they roused up the old memories, and did really, though not literally,
speak to the listeners. The construction of the pipe also helps. It is
the only instrument since the days of the old Highland harp which
represents the Gaelic scale in music, and it is this that makes the pipe
appeal so naturally and so intensely to the Gael. To him, especially if
from home, it speaks of the past of his own race, and of the days of his
youth. In this lies its special charm:—

              “When he hears the bagpipe sound
              His heart will bound like steed for battle.”

Pipe music has many voices, and it expresses many of the emotions which
are given vent to by language that can be printed. Neil Munro, as
enthusiastic a Highlander as any man, does not believe in the “speaking”
theory, but he believes in the descriptive character of the music. As
witness—

  “The tune with the river in it, the fast river and the courageous,
  that kens not stop nor tarry, that runs round rock and over fall with
  a good humour, yet no mood for anything but the way before it.”

The tune that, as _Paruig Dall_ said, had “the tartan of the clan it.”
And—

  “Playing the tune of the ‘Fairy Harp,’ he can hear his forefolks,
  plaided in skins, towsy-headed and terrible, grunting at the oars, and
  snoring in the caves; he has his whittle and club in the ‘Desperate
  Battle’ (my own tune, my darling!), where the white-haired sea-rovers
  are on the shore, and a stain’s on the edge of the tide; or trying his
  art on Laments he can stand by the cairn of Kings, ken the colour of
  Fingal’s hair, and see the moon-glint on the hook of the Druids.”

Most of the old Highland airs were composed on particular occasions, or
for the purpose of conveying particular feelings. One, for instance, is
designed to express the succession of emotions in the mind of an
Ardnamurchan crofter while tilling his soil in an unpropitious season
and hesitating whether to emigrate or attempt to pay his landlord the
triple rent a rival had offered. Another commemorates the arrival of
Prince Charlie at a farmhouse in Skye, where one of his followers was
sent forward to see if he was likely to find friends there. To a
Highland ear the tune expresses the first hesitating, half-whispered
questions of the messenger, then his confidence as he finds the goodwife
favourable, and finally his composed feelings on finding that he was
among friends. Another was composed on an occasion when the Mac Kenzies
attempted to obtain possession of the lands of Mac Donell of
Glengarry.[4] The chief of the Mac Kenzies had his men and allies
assembled at different points, one party being concealed in a church at
Beauly, and, tradition says, this church was burned over the heads of a
worshipping congregation by friends of the Mac Donells. But the pibroch
contradicts this, for when the tune is properly played the listener in
fancy hears the flames rustling and blazing through the timbers of the
church, mingled with the angry remonstrances and half-smothered shouts
of the warriors, but there is no representation of the more feeble
plaints of women and children. Had these been among the victims, their
cries would surely have formed the burden of the tune.[5]

Footnote 4:

  See Index under _Gilliechroist_.

Footnote 5:

  It should be stated that the best authorities now agree that there
  never was a church burned at the place referred to.

Many other instances of descriptive pipe music are to be found. The
pibroch of _Daorach Robbi_ contains the keenest satire ever levelled at
the vice of drunkenness. The ludicrous imitation of the coarse and
clumsy movements, the maudlin and staring pauses, the helpless
imbecility of the drunkard as he is pilloried in the satire with the
ever-recurring sneering notes, _Seall a nis air_ (Look at him now) are
enough to annihilate any person possessing the least sensibility, who,
while hearing them, is conscious of having been in the position
described, even for once in his life. _Gillidh Callum_ is a striking
contrast to _Daorach Robbi_. The total abstainer could hardly find a
better text than the latter, while the man who advocates temperance only
would be strongly supported by the former, which illustrates enlivening
virtues of the fruit of the vine without its degrading effects. So with
most pipe music. It describes something, and in this respect is second
only to the recitative of the bards. It is, of course, necessary that
performer and listeners should be Highland themselves. No one who is not
versed in the poetry and music of the Highlands can impart to others, or
appreciate for himself, the spirit of romance and pathos and love and
sorrow and martial sentiment which is in the music, just as no actor can
play well unless he enters into the spirit of the play. To the
enthusiast for Highland music, the feelings aroused by other instruments
are general and undefined, and common to Frenchman, Spaniard, German, or
Highlander, but the bagpipe is sacred to Scotland. Gaelic itself has a
sentiment that cannot be expressed, and so with its music. It appeals to
us, but we cannot express it, and only those who know it understand it.

And now for one or two of these stories where the pipes are alleged to
have spoken. The best known is that of _A Cholla mo run_, or “The
Piper’s Warning.”[6] The piper and friends were entrapped in Duntroon
Castle, while Coll Citto, his master, and his followers were away at
Islay, and the enemy laid an ambush to entrap the returning party. The
piper one day saw Coll’s boats returning, and he knew that unless
something was done they would sail right into the ambush. So he asked
leave to go out on to the battlements and play a tune. This was granted,
and the piper played extempore music, which to those in the boats
meant:—

Footnote 6:

  See Index under _A Cholla mo run_.

                 “Coll, O my dear, dinna come near,
                 Dinna come near, dinna come near;
                 Coll, O my dear, dinna come near,
                 I’m prisoner here, I’m prisoner here.”

and more to the same purpose. Coll instantly took warning, turned his
boats and fled. But the Campbells, in whose custody the piper was, also
understood, and, some accounts say he had his fingers cut off, others
that he was killed on the spot for his bravery in warning his friends.
All agree that he spoke to Coll in the boats across an expanse of water
by means of the pipes alone, and the tune has ever since been associated
with the incident in which it originated.

Then there is the story of “Women of this Glen,”[7] alleged to have been
instrumental in warning some of the Mac Ians on the eve of Glencoe, and
several others very similar.

Footnote 7:

  See Index under _Bodaích nam Bríogais_.

Some stories come from wars of a less remote date. A Scottish regiment,
we are told, on a sunbaked plain in India, was being mowed down by some
mysterious disease. The doctors could not tell what it was, but the
kilties were being swept off by it, one by one. At last it was
discovered. Away on the outskirts of the camp, in the short still
gloaming of the Eastern evening, a group of the men had gathered round
the regimental piper. Their heads were buried in their hands, and big
hot tears rolled through their fingers. And the weird, wae strains of
“Lochaber no more,” played more melancholy than ever, filled the air.
They were dying of homesickness, and the bagpipe spoke to them of home
and all that was there. Another Scottish regiment had been at the Cape
for a long time, and the officers found that the bagpipe so affected the
men as to make them unfit for duty. The men were homesick, and their
music intensified this feeling, and it had to be stopped for a time. The
men of course knew the tunes, and what they meant, but there is nothing
to show that the same tunes played on another instrument would not have
had the same effect.

We had the old idea revived in all its beauty by one of the ablest of
the war correspondents in the recent South African War. Mr. Julian
Ralph, of the London _Daily Mail_, in a letter to his paper, spoke
eloquently of the services rendered to the Highland Brigade by their
pipers, and of the way in which the pipes spoke to the men and the men
listened to the pipes. He was a stranger to the music, and at first he
was not impressed by it. But gradually he came to like it, and to miss
it when he was not within the range of the notes. Here is how he tells
of the pipes speaking to the men:—

  “Then off strode the fresh player with the streamers floating from his
  pipes, with his hips swaying, his head held high, and his toes but
  touching the earth. Once I heard a man say, ‘Gi’ me the pipes, Sandy;
  I can tell ye what naebody has said,’—at least, those were the strange
  words I thought that I distinguished.”

After General Wauchope was killed along with so many of his men at
Magersfontein, the soldiers were for a time gloomy and dispirited.

  “‘It’s the pipes that make them so,’ said an officer. ‘The pipes are
  keeping them a great deal resentful, and still more melancholy.’ ‘The
  pipes? What have the pipes to do with their feelings?’

  “‘Eh, man? Don’t you know that the pipes can talk as good Scots as any
  man who hears them? Surely ’tis so—and ’tis what the pipes are saying,
  first in one player’s hands and then in another’s, that keeps the men
  from forgetting their part in the last battle.’

  “Once, as the days passed, when I saw this officer again at leisure, I
  went to him for an explanation of his surprising disclosure. I had
  been trying to learn the language of the pipes in the meantime, but I
  acquired no more understanding than a dog has of English when he
  distinguishes between a kindly human tone and a cross one. I could
  tell when a tune was martial and when another was mournful. When a gay
  one rang out—if any had—I would not have mistaken it for a dirge. To
  some this may seem a very little learning, but I had begun by thinking
  all the tunes alike.

  “‘Yesterday,’ said my friend the officer, ‘we’d a little match between
  men who had some skill at embroidering the airs of the old ballads
  with trills of those grace-notes that they call warblers, but this
  contest was broken up by a rugged son of the hills who, after asking
  for the pipes, flung from them a few strong, clear notes which gained
  the attention of all who are born to a knowledge of the music that
  speaks. I am not one of those, but I called my soldier-servant up and
  asked him what was being played.’ ‘Well, sir,’ said he, ‘that’s Mac
  Callum—a great museecian he is. And hark, sir; he has the right of it
  and boldly he is telling every one his thoughts. He says that every
  man kens that the gran’ general who’s dead was as cunning and skilfu’
  in war as ony man above him, and ’tis late in the day—now that he’s
  laid away and dumb—to put blame on him as if he were an ignoramus and
  a butcher, like some others. And now, oh! brawly ye’re tellin’ it, Mac
  Callum—he says there may be scheming and plotting in high places but
  no skullduggery o’ ony sort, however it is gilded, will ever deceive
  ane single true chiel o’ the Highlands.’”

  “‘And then,’ said my gossip, ‘the pipes passed to the hand of another
  man,’ and my servant—seeing me about to move away—touched my arm and
  bade me wait, as this new player was another adept with the pipes.
  ‘He’s grand at it,’ said he; ‘well done, Stewart.’ He’s saying, sir,
  that the reason none will heed those who blame our grand leader that’s
  gone is that there’s men of rank among us—and of proud blood—that’ll
  stand up to any man at home and swear that when our fallen chief came
  back with his orders for the battle he complained of them sorely, but
  he said, ‘No better could he get,’ and when he lay down in his blanket
  his head was full of the trouble that was coming on him—he not being
  able to learn what he needed to know against the morrow.

  “There was more of this recital of what the pipes had spoken to the
  regiment, but it would only be irritating a sore to repeat it. The
  pipers spoke even more plainly as the bold outpourings of one incited
  bolder from another. At last there were suggestions, by pipes grown
  mutinous, of sentiments which, happily, have seldom been spread within
  the British Army. But what I have told suffices to illustrate my sole
  point, which is that the gift of eloquent speech in chords and trills
  is born with the master-pipers.

  “I never saw my officer-friend again for more than a nod or a word in
  passing. But on one day the pipes next door rang jubilantly, and man
  after man applied himself to them with ginger in his touch. Each blew
  triumphant, thrilling, heart-stirring chords, and every piper
  swaggered at his work with such a will as to send his aproned kilt to
  and fro with what seemed a double swing to each beat of the time.

  “I said to myself, ‘They have learned that Hector Mac Donald is coming
  to be their new brigadier, and the pipes are assuring them that every
  Highlander may be himself again, certain of victory and new glory
  under a leader second only to the one they have lost.’ I still believe
  my conjecture was right.

  “And I know from living next door, as it were, that the cloud of gloom
  that had hung over the brigade was dispelled almost with the
  suddenness of its horrid appearance.

  “After that the kilties began to make in this war a continuation of
  their glorious record in so many lesser wars in the time that was.”

All of which is very fine writing, but one cannot get rid of the idea
that Mr. Ralph was the victim of an elaborate joke. The speaking theory
was new to him and he accepted it in all its amplitude. There is no
report of what his officer-friend said when he read Mr. Ralph’s article—
if he ever did read it.

The simple truth about the “language” of the pipes seems to be that a
Highland listener gets from the pipes what, in a more or less degree,
anyone gets from the music he loves—a stimulant for his emotion and
imagination, nothing more. He is an emotional being, and his
imagination, aided and abetted by the sorrows and the joys of many
generations—which affect his disposition though he knows it not—and by
the many associations of particular tunes or styles of playing, runs
riot when he hears the pipes, and to him they speak as no other
instrument ever can speak. A primitive instrument working on the
feelings of a primitive people has a much more direct and intense
psychological effect than on a sophisticated people who have scores of
different cunning instruments and myriads of airs, a fact which should
always be remembered when the “language” of the pipes is discussed.
After all it depends much more on the listener than on the instrument.
In our appreciation of any music, and in the effect it has on us, there
is involved all that we ourselves have been, seen, heard, thought, and—
sometimes—forgot. A plaintive love air brings up the old days, the sunny
weather, the sweethearts of our youth, all the store of associations
that are buried in us, and—who knows?—all the loves and hates, the joys
and sorrows of our dead fathers, modified or intensified by our own
personal character. Therefore to us that plaintive air is the sweetest
of music. To the Highlander the bagpipe conveys the fine rapture a high-
class audience gets, or at least professes to get, from Sarasate’s
violin and Paderewski’s piano. To him it has a direct message, but to
the rest of the world it is what a violin is to him, probably less. But
as for an impromptu tune conveying intelligence like spoken language—ah
well, we must draw the line somewhere.




                              CHAPTER VII.
                      THE LITERATURE OF THE PIPES.

      “I hin-do, ho-dro, hin-do, ho-dro, hin-do, ho-dro,
      hin-da, ho-dra, hin-do, ho-dro, hin-da, chin-drine,
      hin-do, ho-dro, hin-do, ho-dra, hin-do, ho-dro, hin-do,
      ho-dro, hin-do, ho-dro, hin-da, chin-drine, hin-do, ho-dro,
      hin-do, ho-dro, hin-da, hin-da, hin-do, chin-drine.”

  Ancient music lost—Transmission by tradition—Druidical remains—Systems
    of teaching—No books—“Unintelligible jargon”—_Canntaireachd_—The Mac
    Crimmon System—The Gesto Book—A scientific system—A tune in
    _Canntaireachd_—Pipers unable to explain—Earliest printed pipe
    music—Mac Donald’s books—More recent books—Something to be done.


For long, the music of the pipes was so much a part of the life of the
people that no records of tunes were necessary. But there came a time
when interest in these things waned somewhat, and it was then that the
want of printed or written records were felt. By reason of that want, we
now know little or nothing of truly ancient Scottish music. Perhaps we
have not lost much, but in any case it would have been interesting to
know the musical tastes of our forefathers away back in the early
centuries. We are quite willing to believe that some of the exquisite
melodies still existing were handed down to us by Gaelic progenitors,
and are as old as the race itself, but the fact remains that we cannot
trace any of them for more than two or three centuries, nor tell whether
or not they are older than the first mention of them we have in
authentic history. That many of the tunes were composed on incidents or
battles four and five hundred years back does not prove that the tunes
themselves are as old as the events they commemorate. Composers then, as
now, chose their subjects irrespective of dates. The pipes were in
fairly common use about the middle of the seventeenth century, probably
for centuries earlier, and when they were in use, there must have been
music for them. But we have not that music now, thanks to the blank
which occurred between the decay of the system whereby music was taught
orally and the introduction of the educational system of later
centuries. Clanship isolated the people into small communities and
prevented a general knowledge of music from being spread abroad, and it
could not very well be committed to paper when the people knew of no
system of signs which would represent it. So the only method of
preserving the tunes was their transmission from one generation of
pipers to another, a method which rendered it very easy for the
unscrupulous to re-baptise or paraphrase old tunes, and pass them off as
their own, and also left the tunes to change gradually as they passed
from performer to performer. Then, again, the decay of the Gaelic made
it necessary to give English names to Gaelic tunes, and a number of the
finest Highland airs have been wedded to the songs of such poetical
giants as Burns, Hogg, Tannahill, and Cunningham, and their identity
completely lost. Gaelic itself has been kept pure enough through
traditional generations, but the conditions which applied to the music
did not apply to the language. The language was the heritage of an
entire people, their daily bread, as it were; the music was cultivated
only by a class of the people, and was far more subject to change than
the language.

It is alleged that the chanting of Druidical precepts in Pagan times was
imitated by the early Christians, and some remains of Druidical songs,
with music attached, were said to have been in existence so late as
1830, but there is now nothing to show what were the qualities of
Highland music prior to the dates of tunes which are well authenticated.
The music of the pipes is ancient, without a doubt; it passed through a
long evolution process, and it has changed but little since we have
known it committed to paper. That is about all that can safely be said
on the point.

Before people learned to express their thoughts by marks on paper, they
carried the music in their heads. The music teacher nowadays gathers his
books and his scales and his instruments around him; then he gathers his
pupils; then he expounds the theories on which the system of music is
based; then he shows how these theories work out in actual practice, and
then he proceeds to learn his pupils how to practice them. All of which
makes the learning of music a “special subject,” and goes to instil into
the heads of the non-musical the idea that they, too, by reason of
having passed through all the courses, must needs understand music.
Whereas all the time it is only the theory of music, as taught in the
text-books, they understand. This in itself is not a bad thing, if
people incapable of anything higher would be content with it, and not
pose as authorities. But the tendency of our educational system is, or
at least was very recently, towards the production of a race of pedants,
and the creation of a dead level of mediocrity in which the common
person thinks he is as clever as the genius, and the genius is too
modest to hold his head higher than that of the common person. In the
old days, when the difficulties were insurmountable to the common
person, genius shone forth all the brighter. There was little of the
literature of the pipes in these days, and a piper’s ear was his best
teacher. Consequently the great pipers stood head and shoulders above
the common crowd—giants because of their genius and lifelong study. It
is quite likely that the raising of the level of the mass, even at the
expense of genius, may be a good thing, but that is another matter.

Two hundred years ago there were few, if any, books bearing on the
subject, and were it not for the powerful memories of the hereditary
pipers of the different clans, and their devotion to their art, but
little even of the music of that time could have been preserved. The
hereditary pipers were walking storehouses of Highland musical
knowledge. They taught their pupils by ear and off the fingers. Taking
them out to the hillside, they first learned them to chant words with
the tunes in a sort of “unintelligible jargon,” then to finger the
chanter silently from memory, then to play the chanter, and afterwards
to play the pipes themselves. This system, if such it could be called,
required as its very groundwork the possession on the part of the pupil
of an ear for music, a natural aptitude for pipe music, a devotion to
the music peculiar to the Highlands, and an intimate knowledge of and
reverence for all the circumstances which entwined themselves into the
histories of the various tunes. Without these qualifications no man
could be a great piper, and the hereditary pipers were very chary about
beginning to train anyone who did not promise to come up to their
expectations.

The “unintelligible jargon” just referred to is perhaps the most curious
thing in all the history of pipe music. The words are not a fair
description, for it was intelligible enough to the initiated, but from
the point of view of others, no other phrase is suitable. It was, in
short, a system whereby known and fixed sounds in the shape of syllables
represented sounds in the shape of notes of music known to the teacher,
but unknown to the pupil, in such a way that when the pupil, after being
taught, heard a number of the syllables repeated by word of mouth, he
could at once reproduce their prototypes as a bit of pipe music. There
were no signs about it whatever, no noting of the syllables—that is in
the early stages of the system—and it is difficult for us who can hardly
imagine music without conjuring up a book before the mind’s eye, to
grasp the idea. The transmission of music by a system of language signs
is peculiar to the pipes, and no full parallel to _Canntaireachd_, as it
has been called, is to be found in any other country. By this
“unintelligible jargon” of syllables the hereditary pipers trained their
pupils, without the aid of any scales or other notations, and in this
form the tunes were chanted all over the Highlands. To this day many
pipers will give the syllabic wordings of tunes, and several of the more
expert can play the pipes direct from such a notation. The different
teachers of piping—they were always clan pipers—had different systems,
but all were based on the principle of arbitrary and known sounds,
representing certain notes, and a succession of these, of course, a
tune. The system of the Mac Crimmons, hereditary pipers to Mac Leod of
Dunvegan, and the most famous teachers and players, became most popular,
as they had by far the largest number of pupils, and a reference to it
will serve to illustrate the subject.

[Illustration:

  CAPTAIN NEIL MAC LEOD OF GESTO

  (_From a Photograph in the possession of Dr. Keith N. Mac Donald,
    Edinburgh._)
]

Some time or other—the date cannot be fixed—the system was committed to
paper, and in 1828 Captain Neil Mac Leod of Gesto published a book,
giving the notation in actual type. It is perhaps the most remarkable
book that has ever been issued in connection with any musical
instrument. Though to the ordinary reader it is absolute nonsense, so
late as 1880, Duncan Ross, the Duke of Argyll’s piper, who learned his
art orally in Ross-shire from the chanting of John Mac Kenzie, Lord
Breadalbane’s piper, himself a pupil of the Mac Crimmons, could read and
play from it at sight, and as he is still alive can, I suppose, do so to
this day. In the same year, Ross, the Queen’s piper, chanted a tune in
articulate words, and, when compared with the Mac Crimmon language, the
notes were found to be identical in length and rhythm, although the
words were different. It was the same tune expressed by a different set
of words, and the experiment proved that the old pipers did not teach in
a haphazard style, but according to fixed rules. The Mac Crimmons, in
particular, wrote down their tunes, and Captain Mac Leod himself took
down from the dictation of John Mac Crimmon, one of the latest of the
race, a collection of airs, as verbally taught at the “college” at
Dunvegan, which he incorporated in the “Gesto” book. After this it is
not so difficult to believe that a piper, when he heard the instrument,
could imagine it was a language, and know what the player meant him to
understand. When education came, and the notation was printed, it was
seen that it was a system scientifically constructed, and one from which
an expert could read music at sight, just as a pianist can play from the
staff, although he has never seen the piece before. At least three
different systems existed in the Highlands seventy years ago, and Donald
Cameron, Seaforth’s famous piper, and the acknowledged successor of the
Mac Crimmons, though practically an illiterate man, could read ordinary
music, and also had a system of his own.

The “Gesto” Book contains twenty pibrochs, and is now very rare. It was
reprinted some years ago by Messrs. J. & R. Glen, Edinburgh. Captain Mac
Leod had a large manuscript collection of Mac Crimmon pibrochs, as noted
by the pipers themselves, part of which was very old, and part more
modern. Of these he only published a few as an experiment. The verse
given at the head of this chapter is part of the tune _Gilliechroist_,
the first line being interpreted:—

                     “Yonder I see a great smoke.”

The tune afterwards proceeds with “variations,” which complicate the
wording considerably, and make it appear even more unintelligible. Here
again is the _urlar_ or groundwork of “The Prince’s Salute” in the
notation of the Mac Crimmons:—

                  “hi o dro hi ri, hi an an in ha ra,
                  hi o dro ha chin, ha chin hi a chin,
                  hi o dro hi ri, hi an an in ha ra,
                  hi o dro ha chin, ha chin hi chin,
                  hi o dro hi ri, hi an an in ha ra,
                  hi o dro ha chin, ha chin hi a chin,
                  hi o dro hi ri, hi an an in ha ra,
                  hi o dro ha chin, ha chin hi chin.”

It is impossible to discover whether the pipers built up their tunes, as
tunes are nowadays built up from a certain scale, or simply used the
syllables as convenient signs to represent certain fixed notes. Perhaps
no better illustration of the subject is to be found than a pamphlet
published in 1880 by Mr. J. F. Campbell, of Islay, the compiler of
_Popular Tales of the West Highlands_, and entitled _Canntaireachd_. An
interpreter of the notation who could play it at sight, could not
explain it to Mr. Campbell. “It was like asking a thrush to explain the
songs which Mother Nature had taught him”:—

  “A party, of whom three were good musicians and the fourth was used to
  play upon human nature, met, the interpreter came, we chose a word in
  a tune and, asked—

  “‘What is _hirrin_?’

  “‘That is _hirrin_,’ said the piper, and played three notes deftly
  with his little finger by striking a note on the chanter once. Two
  were open notes; one closed.

  “‘Do you know the name of the fingers?’ said the teacher.

  “‘Yes,’ said I, ‘that’s _ludag_, the little finger.’

  “‘Well,’ said the artist, ‘that’s _hirrin_,’ and he played the passage
  several times to show how it was done with the little finger.

  “‘Is _hirrin_ the name of the little finger of the right hand, or the
  name of the hole in the chanter, or the name of the note; or what else
  is it?’

  “‘No,’ said the master, ‘that’s _hirrin_,’ and he played that word
  over again cleverly with the same little finger. Then he continued—

  “‘Old John Mackenzie taught me that in Ross long ago; and he learned
  it over the fire in the Isle of Skye. We used to sit and listen to
  him, and learn what he said and sang, and learn to finger in this
  way.’ Then the piper played silently with his fingers, and every now
  and then he blew the chanter and sounded a passage a breath long from
  the book, which he read easily, but could not explain—and that’s
  _hirrin_—and if any of the party ever hear that particular combination
  of three notes again the name of it will be remembered. It means three
  notes combined.

  “Compared to a book of poetry, it thus appears that each tune is like
  a song, and _hirrin_ is like a word in a line which keeps its place
  and its time in the tune. That much we learned from our interpreter.
  He had learned by rote certain articulate syllables combined as words
  which for him meant passages in a particular pipe tune. For the
  ignorant residue of mankind they meant nothing.”

There Mr. Campbell had to stop, for further light on the subject he
could not obtain. “The pipers’ language,” he says, “is not founded upon
a systematic combination of vowels and consonants to make words, like C
E D, D E C, D E D. It is not a set of names for notes, like Do, Re, Mi,
Fa, Sol, La, Si, Do. Each tune has a different set of words made of
different syllables. Only nine notes can be sounded on the instrument,
and more than sixty syllables occur in a book of twenty tunes.” Mr.
Campbell must have been unaware of the assertion of some enthusiasts
that 3,000,000 combinations can be practised on the pipes, or he would
not have written that last sentence. Proceeding, he says, “it seems that
something natural to human songsters has been spelt with the Roman
alphabet, so that words of one, two, three, four, six, and eight
syllables, do in fact suggest accent rhythm and tune, high and low notes
and whole tunes, which can be learned by rote, written and read, as if
the tunes were songs in an unknown tongue. This is in fact a language
and its music.”

Persevering in his researches Mr. Campbell got Ross, the Argyll piper,
his brother, and a skilled pianist to help him. He opened the Gesto book
at the tune called “The End of the Little Bridge;” Ross read the tune
and sounded the signs on a chanter, while his brother chanted at
intervals sounds which both brothers had learned from oral chanting and
could play on a pipe. The musician with his eyes on the book played his
notes with his left hand on the piano, as he heard them from the pipers,
and wrote them with his right on music paper, according to his own
system. By this means one combination of sounds was translated from the
pipers’ written language into another system of musical notation, and
the result was music, showing that the hereditary pipers, whatever is
the secret of their system, had a system. Were there only as many
different syllables as there are possible notes on the chanter, the
matter would have been easily understood. As it is, the Gesto book is
the only book of its kind in existence. In all countries of the world,
the natives chant tunes to certain strings of syllables, and to this day
we have the “Fal de ral” choruses to a certain class of songs. In the
Highlands alone these apparently nonsensical sentences stood for actual
living music, were written as such, and, in the Gesto book, printed. But
the system which in a continuance of the congenial atmosphere of
clanship and hereditary pipers and schools of piping, and ignorance of
what is now called popular education, might have developed into an exact
science, has been smothered by nineteenth century progress, and is now
known only to piping enthusiasts and students of the antique in our
national life. Various attempts have been made to construct a theory
which would explain the system, but none is thoroughly satisfactory.

Leaving the mystery of _Canntaireachd_, we come to the time when pipe
music was first written in ordinary notation. The piece known as “The
Battle of Harlaw” was played at that encounter in 1411; but it is
significant that the oldest copy of the music extant, supposed to date
from 1620, is not adapted for the bagpipe. The earliest known attempt to
write pipe music in ordinary notation was made in 1784 when Rev. Patrick
Mac Donald, Kilmore, Argyllshire, included in a collection of Highland
Vocal Airs four pipe tunes. In 1803 the same author published a
“Treatise” on the bagpipe, written by his brother, Mr. Joseph Mac
Donald. This contained one tune, suited for beginners. Some time after
the ’45—it must have been a considerable time—Mr. Donald Mac Donald,
bagpipe maker, Edinburgh, was employed by the Highland Societies then
existing to collect and note down as many pibrochs as he could find. In
these days the mysteries of correct time were known to few and those of
metre to fewer; but Mac Donald started with a brave heart, and to him as
much as to the hereditary pipers the Highlands is indebted for the
preservation of much of its pipe music. He collected mostly in the west
country, and it is noticeable that the great majority of tunes now
existing are west country tunes. The east Highlands, doubtless, had its
own pipe music, but for want of a collector most of the airs have been
lost. “Craigellachie,” the gathering of Clan Grant, is the only notable
exception. Mac Donald’s first volume contained twenty-three pibrochs,
but the exact date of its publication is unknown. In 1806, we are told
in Angus Mac Kay’s book, Donald Mac Donald was voted the thanks of the
judges at the annual competition in Edinburgh for having “produced” the
greatest number of pipe tunes set to music by himself. His book,
however, does not seem to have been published then, for from internal
evidence (there is no date) it is obvious that it did not see the light
before 1816. In the volume he promised to give histories of the tunes
when he published a second instalment. A long time after he sent the
manuscript of his second volume to Mr. J. W. Grant of Elchies, then in
India, with a plaintive letter asking him to accept it as no one had
shown so much interest in it as he had, and the publication of the first
volume had nearly ruined him. The manuscript is now in the possession of
Major-General C. S. Thomason, R.E., a grandson of Mr. Grant, and, it is
hoped, will yet be published.

Of a later date, we have the book published in 1838 by Angus Mac Kay,
piper to the Queen. It was a pretentious volume, containing sixty
pibrochs, with histories of the tunes, the lives of the hereditary
pipers, and other interesting matter. It will always be a puzzle to
students of pipe music why Mac Donald and Mac Kay included in their
books so many poor pieces and left out some of the best. Ross’s
collection, which appeared long after, contained some which one would
have thought Mac Kay or Mac Donald might have had. Messrs. Glen,
Edinburgh, published a collection dated 1854, and there are besides the
publications of Mac Phee, Mac Lachlan, Gunn, Henderson, Mac Kinnon,
Bett, and others, all issued later. Most of these, however, appear to
have been based largely on Mac Donald’s and Mac Kay’s books. Mr. David
Glen of Edinburgh has, it may be added, published recently the old pipe
music of the Clan Mac Lean, compiled under the supervision of the Clan
Mac Lean Society of Glasgow.

The Gesto collection of Highland music, edited by Dr. Keith Norman Mac
Donald, and dedicated to the Mac Leods of Gesto, is perhaps the most
outstanding publication in which the music of the pipes has been adapted
for the piano. It was published in 1895. Dr. Mac Donald’s avowed object
was to supply a collection free from all adulteration, and to preserve
the music as it was sung and played by the Highlanders themselves. The
book, while not containing everything that is good in pipe music,
undoubtedly contains a larger selection of the best than any other.
There are songs, pibrochs, and laments; marches, quicksteps, and general
martial music; and also reels and strathspeys, numbering in the
aggregate about three hundred and forty tunes; and all over, the book is
perhaps more interesting and comprehensive than any that has been
issued. A second edition was published in 1898.

In 1896 Major-General Thomason, already mentioned, issued for private
circulation a small volume. In this he foreshadowed a larger, which has
since been published.[8] Major-General Thomason is the possessor not
only of the manuscript of Donald Mac Donald’s proposed second volume,
but also of all the manuscript music left by Angus Mac Kay. Besides, he
spent many years in collecting pibrochs from all possible sources, and
at the present time he believes that he has almost every pibroch known
to be in existence. He has spent much time and labour editing his
collection, and the result is the volume referred to, which is published
under the title of _Ceol Mor_ (the proper title of real pibroch music).
Besides being an extraordinarily diligent collector of tunes, Major-
General Thomason was imbued with the idea of rendering the reading of
pibrochs more easy. He took notes of the difference in times and the
different styles of playing, and became so proficient that he could note
any strange tune from the playing of another piper. It was only a step
further to decide that the signs which he could note down as the tune
was being played would serve as a notation from which the tune could be
replayed. He invented, in fact, a system of shorthand for pipe music,
and then he set about endeavouring to publish a book printed after his
own system, in the hope that pipers would learn it in preference to the
old and cumbersome system. By this means he believes he will further
popularise bagpipe music, but the ordinary notation has now got so firm
a hold that it will be difficult to convince pipers that it will pay
them to learn another. Like ordinary shorthand systems, _Ceol Mor_ is
doubtless capable of improvement; but the idea opens up an altogether
new field in the literature of pipe music, and as the book contains some
two hundred and eighty tunes—the result of thirty years’ collecting—it
is to be hoped that it will prove a success.

Footnote 8:

  Messrs. S. Sidders & Co., Ball Street, Kensington, London.

After all it is not so much more books that are needed as a thoroughly
standard work including all that is best in pipe music set in some
uniform style. There is, however, no getting away from the fact that
this cannot be done with any hope of financial success. The jealousies
of musicians come in the way, and pipers will have some new tunes, even
although it is well known that these, as a rule, are worthless. Nothing
short of an encyclopædia containing everything that has ever been
composed would please everybody, and this would require to be sold for a
few shillings. Then there are the difficulties of copyright—different
persons or publishers claiming different tunes or settings of tunes.
Still, with anything like a common desire to promote the best interests
of national music, these difficulties could to a large extent be
overcome. There never was a more opportune time than the present, there
being so many pipers and the ability to read music being almost
universal. Meantime pipers are struggling along with many tunes and a
good many books with a lot of irregularities and inconsistencies
scattered through them. There is certainly room for improvement, and if
pipers and publishers, or some of the Highland societies—say in Glasgow—
took the matter up in earnest, something could be done to set up a
standard of some kind that would give the music of the pipes its proper
place.




                             CHAPTER VIII.
                          THE PIPES IN BATTLE.

                     “Fhairshon swore a feud
                       Against the Clan Mac Tavish,
                     Marched into their land,
                       To plunder and to rafish.
                     For he did resolve
                       To extirpate the vipers,
                     With four-and-twenty men
                       And five-and-thirty pipers.”

  A Culloden incident—Ancient Celts in battle—The harper and bard
    superseded—First mention of pipes in battle—First regimental pipers—
    In the navy—Prince Charlie’s pipers—An “instrument of war”—A Mac
    Crimmon incident—Power of pipes in battle—A Magersfontein incident—
    Byron’s tribute—Position in actual battle.


Professor Aytoun in these cynically humorous lines, from the “Bon
Gaultier Ballads,” would have us believe that the piper was more
important in times of war than the actual fighting man. He was
important, no doubt, but hardly in the proportion of thirty-five to
twenty-four. The Duke of Cumberland, a man whom Highlanders, and more
especially those with Jacobite leanings, do not hold in very high
reverence, was making ready to meet Prince Charlie at Culloden, and when
he saw the pipers of the clans who supported him preparing their musical
instruments, he asked somewhat testily, “What are these men to do with
such bundles of sticks. I can get far better implements of war than
these.” “Your Royal Highness,” said an aide-de-camp, “cannot get them
better weapons. They are the bagpipes, the Highlanders’ music in peace
and war. Without these all other instruments are of no avail, and the
Highland soldiers need not advance another step, for they will be of no
service.” Then Cumberland, who was too good a tactician to underrate the
value of anything, allowed the pipers to take their part in the fight.
It is difficult to believe, although the story is given on good
authority, that he was so ignorant, but we know that a general who did
not understand the music of his different regiments would nowadays be
considered very deficient indeed. Officers of our day not only
understand about the music, they fully appreciate its value. This is
particularly true of the officers of Highland regiments who, as a rule,
do all they can to foster a love for the pipes, knowing quite well that

            “Its martial sounds can fainting troops inspire
            With strength unwonted and enthusiasm fire.”

The use by the Celts of the bagpipes in battle fits in beautifully with
all we know of the ancient people. Their demeanour in the actual fight
was always remarkable. In old times they did not fight as they do now,
with weapons deadly at long distances from the enemy, and to use which
in a uniform style they are disciplined. Each warrior fought for his own
hand, with his own claymore, subject, after the fight began, to no
system of rules. Before the battle a strange nervous excitement, called
by ancient writers, _crithgaisge_, or “quiverings of valour,” came over
him. This was followed by an overpowering feeling of exhilaration and
delight, called _mir-cath_, or “the joyous frenzy of battle.” It was not
a thirst for blood, but an absorbing idea that both his own life and
fame and his country’s good depended on his efforts, and a determination
to do all that could be done by a resolute will and undaunted spirit.
The _mir-cath_ has been seen in a modified form on several occasions in
modern warfare, but only when the Highland soldier has a chance of
charging with the bayonet. Then that shout which precedes an onset no
foe can withstand is heard, and the Highlanders forget themselves and
rush forward like an irresistible torrent.

The harp was originally the national musical instrument of the
Highlands, but its strains were too soft and melting for the clash of
arms, and the utmost efforts of the harper would fail to rouse the
vengeful fervour of the Gaelic heroes. The pibroch’s shrill summons,
telling the sad tale of devastated straths and homeless friends, with
notes that had often led them to victory aforetime, was needed to gather
them to the fray; it drowned with its piercing tones the wailings of the
bereaved, and called in maddened ardour for revenge on the enemy. It was
perhaps a descent when the pipes had to be substituted for the voice of
the bard, and it was certainly a descent when the pipes as a domestic
instrument superseded the soft and soothing harp. But the two changes
were inevitable, and the first is not so great as it seems. The pipes
almost spoke to the people, and their music was but another language in
which their deeds and those of their ancestors were being preserved.

The bards, who preceded the pipers as an inspiring military force,
seemed themselves not only susceptible to the influence of the _mir-
cath_, but capable of imparting it to others. Before the battle they
passed from clan to clan, giving exhortation and encouragement in wild
recitative strains, and rousing the feelings of the warriors to the
highest pitch of frenzy. When the noise of fighting drowned their
voices, the pipes, after they became general as military instruments,
kept the enthusiasm alive. Both bard and piper helped when the battle
was over to celebrate the deeds of those who had survived and the honour
of the brave who had fallen, the piper’s part of the work being more
often the playing of laments for the departed. By these means, death was
robbed of its terrors, for the honouring of the dead who died nobly
naturally produced a magnanimous contempt for the last enemy. The pipes,
from their first introduction, had no rival as an instrument of war.
That they were used as such in ancient times we have historical proof.
Among the Highlanders the bagpipe is supposed to have superseded the
war-song of the bards about the beginning of the fifteenth century. We
have the tradition of the Clan Menzies that it was used at Bannockburn,
but though we grant that on many occasions

                 “The Menzies’ pipers played so gay,
                 They cheered the clan in many a fray,”

as the family chronicler tells us, we can hardly accept the evidence of
tradition alone, when it is backed up by little or nothing from history.
The first mention of military bagpipe music is given in accounts of the
battle of Glenlivck, in 1594, but it is not until after 1600 that we
find pipers mentioned as men of war by reputable historians. In 1627,
says the Transactions of the Society of Antiquaries in Scotland, a
certain Alex. Mac Naughton of that ilk was commissioned by King Charles
I. to “levie and transport twa hundredthe bowmen” to serve in the war
against France. On January 15th, 1628, he wrote to the Earl of Morton,
from Falmouth, where his vessel had been driven by stress of weather. In
a postscript he said:—

  “My L.—As for newis from our selfis, our bagg pypperis and Marlit
  Plaidis serwitt us in guid wise in the pursuit of ane man of war that
  hetlie followit us.”

The English of the postscript is, like the spelling, a little shaky, and
I am not going to explain how it was possible to pursue “ane man of war
that hetlie followit us,” or whether the pipers frightened the enemy or,
as a cynical writer observes, “merely supplied the wind for the sails”
and helped the ship away. The quotation, however, proves conclusively
that there were soldiers in these days who wore the tartan—“Marlit
Plaidis” is decidedly poetic—and had bagpipers in their company.
“Besides,” continues the Transactions, “the piper Allester Caddel was
followed by a boy,” his gillie presumably, and there were also “Harrie
M’Gra, harper, frae Larg,” and “another piper.”

In 1641, Lord Lothian, writing from the Scottish Army at Newcastle, puts
in a word for the pipers:—

  “I cannot out of our armie furnish you with a sober fiddler; there is
  a fellow here plays exceeding well, but he is intollerably given to
  drink; nor have we many of those people. Our armie has few or none
  that carie not armes. We are sadder and graver than ordinarie
  soldiers, only we are well provided of pypers. I have one for every
  company in my regiment, and I think they are as good as drummers.”

They were evidently better than fiddlers, anyhow.

In 1642 there were regular regimental pipers, and it is believed that
the 21st Royal Scots Fusiliers, then the North British Fusiliers, was
about the first regiment which had them. When the town of Londonderry
was invested in 1689 by James VII., two drums, a piper, and colours were
allotted to each company of infantry, each troop of horse had a trumpet
and a standard, and each troop of dragoons had two trumpets, two
hautbois, and a standard. When the figures relating to the strength of
the army are analysed, it is found that each regiment must have had
fourteen pipers, fifty-six drums, five trumpets, and fourteen hautbois—
that is, if the bands were at full strength.

That pipers were not always confined to the land forces is shown by an
advertisement in the _Edinburgh Courant_ in 1708, asking for “any person
that plays on the bagpipes who might be willing to engage on board a
British man-of-war.” British and Dutch ships are known to have been
lying in Leith Roads at the time, which accounts for the advertisement.
A harper is mentioned as being in the navy as early as 1660, so music
was not a new thing on board a man-of-war.

Although drummers were used in Highland regiments before 1745, the
pipers outnumbered them very much, for whenever one was found who could
play the pipes, the clans compelled him to follow them. Prince Charlie
is said to have had thirty-two, who played before his tent at mealtime,
and that their instrument was considered a weapon of war is proved by
the fact that although a James Reid, one of the pipers who was taken on
the suppression of the rebellion, pleaded that he had not carried arms,
and was not, therefore, a soldier, the Courts decided that the pipe was
a warlike instrument, and punished the performer just as if he had
carried a claymore. When, after the battle of Prestonpans, the Prince
entered Edinburgh, we read that—

                  “As he came marching up the street,
                    The pipes played loud and clear,
                  And a’ the folks came running out
                    To meet the Chevalier.”

At the time of the rebellion the pipers had come to be highly respected
members of the clans. Almost as much so as the bards were in their day.
In 1745 the Mac Leods marched into Aberdeenshire and were defeated at
Inverurie. Mac Crimmon, the great piper from Dunvegan, and master of the
celebrated Skye “college,” was taken prisoner after a stout resistance,
and the following morning it was found that not one of the pipers of the
victorious army played through the town as usual. When asked the reason
of their extraordinary conduct, they answered that while the Mac Crimmon
was in captivity their instruments would not sound, and it was only on
the release of the prisoner that they resumed their duties. The Mac
Crimmons were then, however, so well known all over the Highlands that
the action of the other pipers can hardly be considered remarkable.

Many and many a time has the efficacy of pipe music in rallying men and
leading them on to victory been proved. At Quebec in April, 1760, when
Fraser’s regiment were retreating in great disorder the general
complained to a field officer of the behaviour of his corps. “Sir,” the
officer replied, warmly, “you did very wrong in forbidding the pipers to
play this morning; nothing encourages the Highlanders so much in the day
of battle, and even now they would be of some use.” “Then,” said the
general, “let them blow like the devil if that will bring back the men.”
The pipers played a favourite martial air, and the Highlanders, the
moment they heard it, reformed, and there was no more disorder. When the
regiment raised by Lord Mac Leod in 1778, called the 73rd or Mac Leod’s
Highlanders, was in India, General Sir Eyre Coote thought at first that
the bagpipe was a “useless relic of the barbarous ages and not in any
manner calculated to discipline troops.” But the distinctness with which
the shrill sounds made themselves heard through the noise of battle and
the influence they seemed to exercise induced him to change his opinion.
At Port Novo in 1781, he, with eight thousand men, of which the 73rd was
the only British regiment, defeated Hyder Ali’s army of twenty-five
battalions of infantry, four hundred Europeans, from forty thousand to
fifty thousand horse, and over one hundred thousand matchlock men, with
forty-seven cannon. The 73rd was on the right of the first line, leading
all the attacks, and the general’s notice was particularly attracted by
the pipers, who always blew up the most warlike strains when the fire
was hottest. This so pleased Sir Eyre Coote that he called out—“Well
done, my brave fellows, you shall have a set of silver pipes for this.”
And he was as good as his word, for he gave the men £50, and the pipes
which this bought had an inscription testifying to the high opinion the
general had of the pipers. At the battle of Assaye, again, the musicians
were ordered to lay aside their instruments and attend to the wounded.
One of the pipers who obeyed this order was afterwards reproached by his
comrades. Flutes or hautbois, they told him, they could well spare, but
for the piper, who should always be in the heat of the battle, to go to
the rear with the whistles was a thing unheard of. The unfortunate piper
was quite humbled, but he soon had an opportunity of playing off the
stigma, for in the advance at Argaun shortly after, he played with such
animation that the men could hardly be restrained from breaking the line
and rushing to the charge before the time.

Of a different nature is a story told of the Seaforth Highlanders. On
the 12th of August, 1793, as the grenadiers of Captain Gordon’s company
at Pondicherry were on duty in the trenches, exposed to a burning sun
and a severe cannonade from a fortress near by, Colonel Campbell, field
officer of the trenches, ordered the piper to play some pibrochs. This
was considered a strange order to be made at such a time, but it was
immediately complied with, and, says the writer of the chronicles of the
regiment, “we were a good deal surprised to perceive that the moment the
piper began, the fire from the enemy slackened, and soon almost entirely
ceased. The French all got upon the works, and seemed more astonished at
hearing the bagpipes than we with Colonel Campbell’s request.” It was a
new kind of warfare, and again justifies the use of the appellation
“weapon” instead of “instrument” used by the court which tried the
Jacobite piper in 1746.

We all know the story of Lucknow, and though we know that, as a matter
of history, it is entirely discredited, we cannot deny its extreme
probability, and the intense effect the sound of the pipes in the
distance would have had on the fainting men and women in the Residency.
Something like the Lucknow story is that of Prince Charlie, who, when
the clans were slow in gathering to his standard at Glenfinnan, retired
to a hut and rested, disheartened and anxious. When at noon on the 19th
of August no appearance was made he became hopeless, but in the
afternoon the sound of the pipes made themselves heard, and shortly
after the clans appeared. This is the moment which the authoress of the
well-known song, “The March of the Cameron Men,” has described:—

      “Oh proudly they walk, but each Cameron knows
        He may tread on the heather no more,
      But boldly he follows his chief to the field,
        Where his laurels were gathered before.

          “I hear the pibroch, sounding, sounding,
            Deep o’er the mountain and glen,
          While light springing footsteps are trampling the heath,
            ’Tis the march of the Cameron men.”

A good instance of the power of the pipes to rally men is told of the
fateful battle of Magersfontein, during the present war in South Africa.
When, at one stage, it seemed as if “retreat” had been sounded, a piper
tried to tune his pipes, but his lips were too dry. A major handed him
his own water bottle, and immediately afterwards, “Hey, Johnnie Cope”
rang out. The men gathered round the piper as he stood there playing,
marking time with his foot, and the tide was turned. The soldiers were
sifted back into regiments and companies, and something like order was
evolved out of chaos.

Foreigners do not understand how a certain kind of music can have such a
powerful effect on men, and even our friends south of the Cheviots have
been known to sneer at it, but the facts are too stubborn to ding, and
they are acknowledged by men of the highest military experience. Perhaps
there is no nobler tribute to their power and military beauty than that
of Lord Byron, himself an Englishman:—

       “And wild and high ‘The Cameron’s Gathering’ rose,
         The war note of Lochiel, which Albyn’s hills
       Have heard, and heard, too, have her Saxon foes:—
         How in the noon of night that pibroch thrills,
         Savage and shrill! But with the breath which fills
       Their mountain pipe, so fill the mountaineers
         With the fierce native daring which instills
       The stirring memory of a thousand years
       And Evan’s, Donald’s fame rings in each clansman’s ears.”

The Highland soldier has proved on many a hard-fought field the
inspiring influence of

              “Those thrilling sounds that call the might
              Of old Clan-Alpine to the fight,”

but in all the great battles fought and won by Highlanders since 1689
the pipes have not been used in the actual charge. There is an
impression that the regimental piper keeps in front of, or alongside,
his men, and actually plays them into the enemy’s ranks, and this idea
has been largely fostered by the pictures that have appeared of such
incidents as that of Dargai. As a matter of fact such a method is
totally impracticable. In a regiment in line advancing, the pipe band is
formed up in the centre, behind the reserves. When a charge is about to
take place, the word of command, “Prepare to Charge,” is given, and
every soldier knows what this means. When the word, “Prepare to Charge,”
is given, the front rank comes to the charge, while the rear rank
remains at the slope. Meantime the line section, or whatever the party
may be, steadily advances. Simultaneously the pipers strike up the
charge in marching time, and all ranks anxiously await the command,
“Charge.” When this comes the pipers and drummers instantly change from
marching to double time. With the music and the cheers and shouts of the
Highlanders, the charge is pressed home, being generally made at a
distance of from fifty to sixty yards from the enemy, the piper closely
following up his regiment, company, or section, playing the charge and
thus cheering the troops onward. All then is confusion and wild
excitement, and after that the battle is either lost or won. To rally
the regiments the “assembly” is sounded, preceded by the regimental
call, to distinguish what regiment should respond. After the melee every
battalion forms up at lightning speed on their markers, and are again
under the control of their officers for the furtherance of any other
movement. Such is the position of a pipe band when a charge is made in
line. There is another way while troops are manœuvring, and when the
pipers may be ordered to rejoin their companies. Their position then
would be behind the centre of their companies, with the buglers, at
various points. It is then quite possible for the piper or pipers to act
precisely in the same way behind their companies as the combined band
would do behind the battalion if they were in line. Under extraordinary
circumstances, where troops are detached outside of military rule, one
cannot easily define where the piper might be placed—he might be
anywhere. We read that in former wars, such as the Peninsular, where a
breach was made by the troops, pipers sometimes got inside the breach,
and, standing on the ramparts, played their hardest to encourage the
troops; but under ordinary circumstances the piper’s position is behind
his party; and if he is professionally unemployed, he occupies himself
in attending to his fallen comrades or performing any other duty that
may be assigned to him. It is hardly possible, considering the methods
of modern warfare, to think of circumstances in which a piper should
lead a charge in front of his company.

Although we must sweep away this cherished idea and consign it to the
region of muzzle-loading guns and frontal attacks, this does not in the
least reduce the military value of the instrument. There is no music
half so good for marching purposes as that of the pipes and drums. It
gives the soldiers a quick swinging step, taking them over the ground
without a drag. This cannot be said of the brass or fife band. The
pipers carry no cumbrous accoutrements, and when their bags are full
they can keep up the music for two or three miles; in fact, on one
occasion in India the Black Watch pipers played for over four miles.
During the Indian Mutiny the marching of the British soldier was a
wonder to all who knew the climate, the more so, as much of it had to be
done with a hot sun beating down upon the feather bonnets and red coats
as their wearers toiled across a country of sand, with camels,
elephants, bullocks, and camp followers by the thousand, often marching
close upon the column. The swing and go of a Highland regiment is
something peculiar to itself, and is due in great measure to the pipes.
It is something born of the music, and it has often proved its value in
actual warfare, where marching was conjoined with fighting, as, for
instance, with the 93rd at Balaclava, where

                  “That thin red line of Gaelic rock,
                    Just tipped with shining steel,
                  Answered with long and steady stride
                    Their own loved pipes’ appeal.”




                              CHAPTER IX.
                          THE PIPER AS A HERO.

      “Never in battlefield throbbed heart so brave
        As that which beats beneath the Scottish plaid,
      And when the pibroch bids the battle rave
        And level for the charge their arms are laid,
        Where lives the desperate foe that for such onset staid?”

  One cowardly piper—At Philiphaugh—At Bothwell Bridge—At Cromdale—The
    Peninsular War—At Waterloo—Reay Country pipers—At Candahar—At
    Lucknow—In America—In Ashanti—In the Soudan—In South Africa.


The pipers of a regiment are exposed to very much the same dangers as
are the soldiers, and in all the history of British warfare we read of
only one cowardly piper. This was _Raoghull Odhar_, a Highlander, who,
being one day in the exercise of his duty in the battlefield along with
his clan, was seized with such terror at the sight of the enemy, whom he
thought too many for his party, that he left off playing and began to
sing a most dolorous song to a lachrymose air. Some stanzas were picked
up by his comrades, and afterwards when an adult was seen crying for
some trifling cause he was said to be singing “Dun Ronald’s tune.”
Likewise when a Highlander threatened vengeance for some boisterous
mischief he would say, “I will make you sing Dun Ronald’s tune.” Where
or when the incident which gave rise to the saying took place we cannot
tell, and so the only story of a cowardly piper that we have on record
is not very well authenticated.

On the other hand, we have numerous instances of the bravery of pipers.
Away back as far as the battle of Philiphaugh we have a duplicate of the
Dargai incident, only more so. There is a part of the Ettrick opposite
the field of battle called “The Piper’s Pule.” Tradition says that a
piper belonging to Montrose’s army planted himself on a knowe
overhanging this part of the river, during the course of the engagement,
cheered his companions, who were fighting below, with a well-known
cavalier tune, the refrain of which was:—

                    “Whirry, Whigs, awa’ man,
                      Whirry, Whigs, awa’,
                    Ye’re but a pack o’ brosy mou’s,
                      Ye’ll dae nae gude at a’,”

until one of Leslie’s men sent a shot across the water which brought the
piper tumbling down the brae and laid him snug in the pool which bears
his name. Then, again depending on tradition, at the battle of Bothwell
Bridge in 1679, the piper to Clavers’ own troop stood out on the brink
of the Clyde playing “Awa’, Whigs, awa,” with great glee, but, being
struck by a bullet, he rolled down the bank in the agonies of death, and
always as he rolled over the bag, so intent was he on the old party
tune, that with determined firmness of fingering he made the pipes to
yell out two or three notes more of it, till at last he plunged into the
river and was carried peaceably down the stream among a great number of
Whigs. There is a striking resemblance between the two traditions, and
possibly they are but variations of one, but I give them as I find them.

Another piper hero of these early days took part in the battle at the
Haughs of Cromdale, an engagement which ended the civil war in Scotland
in 1690. On the first day of May in that year the Jacobites were
unexpectedly attacked by the Royalists, and were literally driven across
Cromdale Hill. In the rout one of the Jacobite pipers was badly wounded,
but he managed to climb on the top of a large boulder on the hillside,
and on this elevated perch he played tune after tune until he fell off
the stone, dead. The stone is known to this day as _Clach-a-phiobair_,
or the Piper’s Stone.

Coming to times of which we have better historical records, we find
similar incidents multiplying. The pibroch sounded at Waterloo where
fire was hottest, at Lucknow it was heard above the din of battle; at
Alma, when Sir Colin Campbell’s voice, clear and sharp as a trumpet,
sounded “Forward Forty-second,” the notes of the bagpipes rose over
Kourgave Hill, as the veteran rode through the river and up the slope.
At Arroyo-de-Molinos the pipes wakened and frightened the Frenchmen in
the grey dawn of a rainy morning and scattered a whole brigade to the
tune of “Hey, Johnnie Cope, are ye waking yet?” At Puebla Heights, on
the morning after Vittoria, they animated the Gordons in the face of
immense odds to keep the position for many hours, and at Dargai, in our
own day, the pipes played the Gordons up the steep slope, although the
piper was too badly wounded to do more than play. Findlater’s gallantry
has been widely extolled, and there is no desire to detract from the
merit of his performance, but a very slight study of the history of the
Highland regiments will show anyone that there have been many deeds just
as brave, and done, too, by pipers of whom nothing whatever has been
heard.

Here are a few good instances of the bravery of pipers in the story of
the Peninsular War. At the battle of Assaye, when the Ross-shire Buffs
charged, the pipers stood to their posts and kept up their music until
they were disabled one after another by the fire of the enemy. At Cuidad
Rodrigo, John Mac Lachlan, a piper of the 74th, was among the first to
mount the walls. Once there he tuned up and played “The Campbells are
coming.” John was a cool as well as a brave man, for when, on the
ramparts, a shot penetrated the bag of his pipes, he calmly sat down
where he was and repaired the damage, and soon he was up again and
playing his comrades on to victory. At Vittoria the 92nd stormed the
town, the band playing all the time amid a storm of shot and shell.
Napier, in the _History of the Peninsular War_, referring to this, says:
“The pipers contributed in no small degree to produce the enthusiasm.
They headed the charge, striking up a favourite war tune composed
centuries before. Their warlike music inspired their comrades with a
fury nothing could resist.... How gloriously did that regiment come
forth again to the charge, their colours flying and their pipes playing
as if at review.” At Vimiera, George Clark, piper to the 71st, was
wounded in the leg by a musket ball as the regiment was advancing.
Sitting down, he put his pipes in order, and calling out, “Weel, lads, I
am sorry I can gae nae farther wi’ you, but deil hae my saul if ye sall
want music,” he struck up a favourite air with the utmost unconcern, and
played until victory was secure. This piper afterwards appeared in a
competition in the Edinburgh Theatre-Royal (Findlator’s story was but
history repeating itself after all), where he was warmly greeted.
Whether he was successful history sayeth not, but that he was a good
performer is proved by the fact that he was afterwards piper to the
Highland Society of London. Charles Mackay made one of his prettiest
poems on this piper’s bravery, which, excusing the slip made in speaking
of people dancing reels to pibroch music, a slip hardly excusable in
Charles Mackay, is worth quoting entire:—

        “A Highland piper shot through both his feet,
          Lay on the ground in agonising pain;
        The cry was raised, ‘The Highlanders retreat;
          They run, they fly, they rally not again!’
        The piper heard, and, rising on his arm,
          Clutched to his heart the pipes he loved so well,
        And blew a blast—a dirge-like shrill alarm,
          That quickly changed to the all-jubilant swell
        Of ‘Tullochgorum.’ Swift as lightning flash,
          Or fire in stubble, the tumultuous sound
        Thrilled through the clansmen’s hearts, and with a dash
          Of unreflecting valour, at one bound
        They turned upon their hot-pursuing foes,
          And faced them with one wild tempestuous cheer
        That almost drowned the music as it rose
          Defiant o’er the field, loud, long, and clear!
        Scotland was in it, and the days of old
          When, to the well-remembered pibrochs of their sires,
        They danced the exultant reel on hillsides cold,
          Or warmed their hearts with patriotic fires.
        The startled enemy, in sudden dread,
        Staggered and paused, then, pale with terror, fled;
        The clansmen followed—hurling shout on shout—
        In martial madness on the hopeless rout.
        ’Twas but five minutes from the set of sun,
        And ere it sank the victory was won!
        Glory and honour, all that men can crave,
        Be thine, O piper, bravest of the brave!”

We have several stories of Waterloo which point the same moral. One
piper was shot in the leg before he got properly started with his music,
and this so roused his Highland blood that, dashing his pipes to the
ground, he drew his broadsword and fought with the fury of a lion until
he died from many wounds. A pipe-major of the Gordons placed himself on
an eminence, amid a shower of shot, and proudly sounded the battle
charge, and Piper Kenneth Mac Kay, a native of Tongue, and one of the
79th Cameron Highlanders, specially distinguished himself at Quatre Bras
a few days earlier. During the formation of the regiment, while the
brigade was threatened by a body of French cavalry, Piper Mac Kay calmly
stepped outside the bayonets and played _Cogadh na Sith_ with inspiring
effect, almost right in front of the enemy. The incident is best told in
a poem by Alice C. Mac Donnell, of Keppoch, contributed to the _Celtic
Monthly_ of June, 1895:—

               “As roe-deer reared within the forests,
                 At Quatre Bras they bounded o’er,
               Graceful, poised, with scarce an effort,
                 The fifteen feet of bank before.
               Then their famous charge was driven
                 Home to the advancing force;
               Back upon the bridge they huddled,
                 The troopers of Napoleon’s horse.
               Theirs the charge the guns to cover,
                 Theirs to hold that dangerous post;
               Volley upon volley answered
                 From the hedge this charging host.
               Side by side they fought untiring,
                 Full upon their column drove
               The pressing mass of horsemen, falling
                 Back, in vain for order strove.
               When their shot gave out, retreating
                 Step by step in steady line,
               Till their square reformed and bristled,
                 Glistening showed the bayonets’ shine.
               Wild on high the pipes resounded
                 From Mac Kay, who stepped without;
               ‘_Cogadh na Sith!_’ the soldiers answered,
                 With a loud, triumphant shout.
               Wild notes playing, streamers flying,
                 Defiance to the foe was thrown;
               Exposed, undaunted, marched the hero,
                 Playing round the square alone.”

There died at Melrose in 1899, a woman of ninety-eight, a daughter of
the regiment, who heard the guns at Quatre Bras and saw a piper play the
Highland Brigade past to the tune of “Hey, Johnnie Cope,” after his legs
had been cut off below the knee. This can hardly have been Mac Kay, but
it may well have been one of the same name, for at that time there were
more pipers from the Reay Country in the army than from any other
district of Scotland. Skye and Tongue produced more pipers and gave more
pipers to the army than any other two districts, from which it is
argued, quite legitimately, that there must have been a piping college
at Tongue as well as at Dunvegan.

From the far east, too, we have instances of the bravery of pipers.
There is living in Glasgow at the present day, William Middleton, who
was for twenty-one years piper to the Gordon Highlanders. At the battle
of Candahar, while playing to his company, his pipes suddenly stopped.
He sat down to mend them, and his comrades said he was dead; but “Na,
na,” said the piper, “I’m worth twa dead men yet,” and forthwith he got
up, and blew away as hard as ever. He continued playing, and, when the
engagement was over, it was found that one bullet had gone through his
pipes, another had knocked the brass off his helmet, another gone
through his kilt, another knocked a button off his coat, another gone
through his water-bottle, another through his haversack, and another had
struck the heel of his boot. And he himself escaped unscratched.

At Lucknow, no sooner had the 93rd forced their way through the breach
than John Mac Leod, then pipe-major, who was right in the front, began
to encourage the men by vigorously playing his pipes. The more hot and
deadly the fire became, the more highly strung became the piper’s
feelings, and the louder squealed the pipes, John standing the while in
perfectly exposed positions, in which he must have appeared to the enemy
like some unearthly visitant. There he stood for over two hours, while
bayonet and rifle did their work. A similar story comes from the
American War of Independence. The 42nd Highlanders helped to storm Fort-
Washington, and a piper was one of the first to reach the top of the
ramparts. Once there he began to play the slogan of his clan, which so
roused his comrades that they rushed the heights, carrying everything
before them. The brave piper, however, lost his life just as victory was
assured. Another piper of the 42nd Highlanders distinguished himself in
a more recent war. With the regiment at the Gold Coast there was James
Wotherspoon, a native of Falkirk, and a piper. At the battle of Amoaful,
in the heat of the action, when brave men were falling on every hand,
Wotherspoon cheered them on with martial music, and afterwards assisted
to carry Major William Baird, who was mortally wounded, off the field.
For this act of devotion, Queen Victoria, at Windsor, presented the
piper with the medal for distinguished conduct in the field.

In the Ashanti War there was an instance of bravery under circumstances
more trying than open battle. When the Black Watch entered Coomassie,
they had to march through a dense jungle infested by savages. But they
formed in procession, and, headed by the pipers, and firing at hidden
enemies on either side, they stepped—

                  “Into the depth of the forest shade
                  Into the gloom of the chasm made,
                  Into the ambush of deadly night,
                  In midst a dashing glare of light.
                  Quick in response a volley burst
                  With deadly aim, the foemen curst.
                  High o’er the din the pipers blew,
                  The hardy Scots marched two by two,
                  No halt, no pause, the swinging pace
                  Lost not one atom’s form or grace.”

And they got into Coomassie, but it must have taken no ordinary courage
to make men play at the head of such a column, themselves with no
weapons of defence. Firing at an unseen foe among the kopjes of the
Transvaal was child’s play to it.

Recent wars have been equally fruitful in similar incidents. Piper James
Stewart of the Cameron Highlanders, who was killed at the battle of the
Atbara, was found to have seven bullets in his body. He gallantly led
the charge, playing “The March of the Cameron Men,” and during a bit of
rough and bloody work, he mounted a knoll and stood playing the tune
until he fell mortally wounded. Piper Mac Lellan, of the Highland Light
Infantry, kept playing his pipes at the battle of Magersfontein, amid a
hail of bullets, encouraging the scattered Highlanders to re-unite in
the attack, and he was mentioned by Lord Methuen in his despatches for
bravery in charge of stretcher bearers. At the same engagement, Pipe-
sergeant James Mac Kay of the 91st Highlanders, a native of the Reay
Country and one of the official pipers to the Clan Mac Kay Society,
standing in absolutely exposed positions, rallied parties of his
regiment over and over, earning the admiration of all ranks. At
Elandslaagate, a piper of the Gordon Highlanders, Sergeant Kenneth Mac
Leod, a native of Lewis, continued playing after he had received several
wounds, and only stopped when a bullet smashed his pipes.

The pipe-major of the 2nd Seaforth Highlanders, who also served in South
Africa, is a son of the well-known military piper, Ronald Mac Kenzie,
now in the service of the Duke of Richmond and Gordon at Gordon Castle,
Fochabers. He was through Magersfontein and all the other battles with
the Seaforths, and escaped with a scratch on the left leg and the loss
of his chanter, which was smashed into bits by a bullet. More instances
might be given, but these will suffice. Pipers have done quite as much
as soldiers, in proportion to their numbers, to falsify estimates like
that of the Soudanese women, who, when they first saw the kilted
regiments of Kitchener’s expedition, thought they were men who had got
into disgrace at home, been deprived of their trousers, and degraded to
the level of women.




                               CHAPTER X.
                         THE REGIMENTAL PIPER.

        “The Esk was swollen sae red and sae deep,
        But shouther to shouther the brave lads keep;
        Twa thousand swam ower to fell English ground,
        And danced themselves dry to the pibroch sound.”
                                                —_Lady Nairne._

  Preserving the pipes—Regimental bands—Pay of army pipers—The seven
    pipers of Falkirk—Duties of regimental pipers—The meaning of
    “Retreat”—A story of Napoleon—In a social capacity—An army wedding—A
    military funeral—At the officers’ mess—Awkward incidents—
    “Boberechims.”


Nothing has helped more to preserve the bagpipe as our national musical
instrument than the fact that it has always been used in connection with
the Highland regiments. On several occasions officers, always English,
it should be noted, have tried to get the bagpipe superseded by
instruments more to their own taste, but they have always failed. The
sentiment in favour of the pipes was too much for them, and the
arguments were too strong to be slighted by the Crown authorities. In
one case, indeed, a regiment did lose its pipes. The 91st, or
Argyllshire Highlanders, landed at Dover in April, 1850, and were
inspected by Major-General G. Brown, C.B., K.H., then Adjutant-General
to the Forces. For some reason which has never been explained he ordered
the immediate abolition of the pipes, which the men clung to as the last
that was left to remind them of the origin, history, and nationality of
the corps. This seemed a harsh and uncalled for proceeding, and that it
was so is proved by the fact that the authorities afterwards made ample
amends to the regiment.

In the British army there are twenty-two pipe bands, one to each
battalion of the following regiments:—

                   Scots Guards.
                   Royal Scots.
                   Royal Scots Fusiliers.
                   Borderers.
                   Cameronians.
                   Royal Highlanders.
                   Highland Light Infantry.
                   Seaforth Highlanders.
                   Gordon Highlanders.
                   Cameron Highlanders.
                   Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders.

The number of men allowed to each band as full pipers, that is, the
number authorised by the War Office, is six—one sergeant-piper (formerly
pipe-major) and five pipers—but each battalion has always ten or twelve
men in its pipe band, those above the regulation number being acting
pipers. Only the Highland regiments and the Scots Guards are allowed a
sergeant in excess of the ordinary strength to perform the duties of
sergeant-piper. Members of the band get the same pay as drummers—1d. per
day more than ordinary privates—with the opportunity to earn “extras” by
playing outside at parties, in public parks, or in any other way. The
sergeant-piper and his five comrades are clothed by Government, and a
fund is supported by the officers of each battalion, out of which the
cost of the pipes, both for full and acting pipers; long hose, buckled
shoes, etc., and the uniform for the acting pipers is defrayed. Captains
of companies, however, supply their pipers with banners. The pipers are
all drilled in the same way as other soldiers, their training as pipers
only beginning after they have served in the ranks for some time.
Tuition is given free of charge by competent sergeant-pipers, and any
lad joining a Highland regiment will be taught the pipes properly if he
chooses. Pipers are generally Highlanders, and it is a remarkable fact
that in the time between the middle of the eighteenth and the beginning
of the nineteenth century, Skye alone furnished five hundred pipers for
the British Army—an average of ten a year. Regimental pipers are,
however, quite often Lowlanders, and it is doubtful if any Highland town
can boast of having had five pipers in one regiment, as Falkirk, a
Lowland town, can. Robert Galbraith, from Falkirk, joined the 42nd in
1854, and served through the Crimea, the Indian Mutiny, and the fighting
which ended at Coomassie. Pipe-major James Honeyman, still alive, came
through the Mutiny and Ashanti Wars, leading his regiment into
Coomassie. John Honeyman, his brother, was also a piper, and so was
their father before them. The fifth 42nd piper was James Wotherspoon,
who joined after the Mutiny and followed his colours to the Gold Coast.
Besides, two other Falkirk men were pipers in the Black Watch—Alexander
Mac Intosh and George W. Alexander—making a record which can hardly be
beat by any other town of similar size, Highland or Lowland. When,
during the Mutiny, the four Highland regiments marched from Lucknow,
their pipers numbered one hundred and forty all told, quite a
respectable number of fighting musicians.

The duties of regimental pipers are too numerous to give in detail, but
it may be worth while to describe “Reveille” and “Tattoo.” “Reveille” is
generally sounded at early morn by the bugler on duty, or sometimes by
all the buglers followed by the pipers and drummers playing round the
camp to rouse the troops. No sooner is “Reveille” sounded than the camp
becomes animated with busy men preparing for the routine of the day. The
tune is usually “Up and waur them a’, Willie,” “Hey, Johnnie Cope,” or
sometimes “Up in the morning’s no for me.” As “Reveille” begins the day,
so “Tattoo” is the signal that another day has gone. The guards turn out
and stand under arms, picquets are mounted and sentries posted, all in
undress and greatcoats, and gates are closed for the night. Of all
ceremonies in which a pipe band is engaged, “Tattoo” is the most
attractive to spectators. Drummers and pipers march to the ground in
full kilt and feather, and form up in perfect silence, save for the curt
word of command. The buglers form up in front of the pipers, and at the
order, “Sound off,” a shrill blast is sounded by the buglers, who then
disappear. Drums are slung and pipes placed in position. At the word of
command the tattoo rolls are gone through, then the order, “Quick
march,” is given, and the band steps off, taking up the usual rolls as
in an ordinary march. They march and counter-march the length of the
parade ground, and come to the halt in the exact position they started
from. Then the music ceases, and the tattoo rolls are beat off as
before, after which all are marched back to quarters and dismissed. Old
Highland tunes are invariably played for “Tattoo,” “My Faithful Fair
One,” and the “Cock o’ the North” being favourites. Other tunes, too,
have been dedicated by custom for special occasions—as, for instance,
“Highland Laddie” for the march past, or when troops advance in review
order; “The Crusaders’ March,” for reviews and inspections, at mess,
tattoo, or parade; “Bannocks o’ Barley Meal,” or “Brose and Butter,” for
breakfast, dinner, or tea, and sometimes for officers’ mess; and “Hey
Johnnie Cope” as the warning for parade. “The Haughs o’ Cromdale,” as is
well known, is always played by the Gordons’ pipers when the regiment is
at the charge, though, by some inexplicable slip, it got mixed up with
the “Cock o’ the North” at Dargai.

A good deal of misunderstanding sometimes crops up through the use of
the word “retreat” in relation to the pipes. A story is told of the
great Napoleon which illustrates this very forcibly. Having heard from
afar the skirl of the pipes, the Emperor wished to know more of the
music, and so when a Highland piper was captured, he sent for him that
he might hear him play. “Play a Pibroch,” said Napoleon, and the piper
played a pibroch. “Play a March,” next asked the Emperor, and a march
was played. Then “Play a Retreat”; but at this the Highlander looked up
in surprise. “Play a Retreat! I have not learned to play a Retreat,” was
the reply, and the pipes remained silent. The story is improbable on the
face of it. First, because it is the buglers and not the pipers who
sound the retreat; second, because there is no historical record of
Napoleon having ever captured a piper; third, because the same story has
been told of a drummer boy of the Guards who fell into the hands of the
French; and fourth, because, in any case, the word “retreat” used in
this sense does not mean that the men are running away from the enemy.
It only means “retire,” or if in barracks it means that the time when
the gates are shut for the night has come. There is no doubt, however,
that the word is not very well chosen, and that on account of its
significance in other connections, it might with advantage be dispensed
with in favour of a better.

Many stories are told, showing that the regimental pipers not only keep
up the spirits of the men, but are themselves worthy of their position
as a social force. At the Cape of Good Hope in 1805 the Seaforths
suffered excessively from the heat. On one of their marches, although
the fatigue was extreme, during a momentary halt the grenadier company
requested the pipers to play for them, and they danced a Highland reel,
to the astonishment of the 59th Regiment, which was close in the rear.
In the Indian Mutiny, again, in a time of imminent peril, “as we,”
writes the author of _The Highland Brigade_, “approached a big bungalow
our hearts were cheered by the sound of the bagpipes playing a foursome
reel. When we were halted and dismissed I went into the building, and
there were four or five sets dancing with all their might.” The terrors
of the Mutiny did not quench their musical ardour—more likely they
intensified it.

In the Gordons and in some other Scottish regiments, when a marriage
occurs in the ranks, the happy bridegroom is forcibly seized by his
comrades and placed on a table elevated on the shoulders of four stout
fellows. On the table a man ludicrously dressed to represent a woman and
personate the bride has been placed to await him. Both are furnished
with a bag, one of soot and the other of flour, and they belabour each
other unmercifully, while their uproarious following form up in military
order, and march after them round the camp to the tune of “Woo’d an’
Married an’ a’,” played by one of the regimental pipers. The procession
is most grotesque, and is headed by a stalwart comrade acting as drum-
major, and absurdly dressed in old blankets, etc., his staff of office
being a mop, crowned by a 4lb. loaf, which he majestically brandishes in
a style irresistibly comic. The procession ends at the canteen, where
the bridegroom, as the price of release from his by no means enviable
position, must treat his merry following in suitable style.

At a military funeral the band draws up in two ranks facing each other
on the right flank of the procession, with a space of about two paces
between the men, and forming a lane wide enough to allow of the passing
of a gun carriage or hearse. As the cortege begins to move the firing
party first pass through the lane in file, with arms reversed. The band
follows, closing up in playing order. Next comes the body, the following
party, and civilians and friends. When well clear of the house or
hospital, the command “Slow march” is given, when the rolls are taken up
in slow time. After the start one half the side drummers keep up the
rolls during the first part of the tune, and are relieved in the second
part by the other half. The drums, of course, are muffled. Should the
cemetery be some distance off, the procession breaks into quick time, in
which case the pipers play no more until within a reasonable distance
from the ground, when slow time is again taken up, and the band plays
till the cortege has passed in. They then cease, and follow up, placing
themselves in a convenient position near the grave. On the first volley
being fired, the first bar of the “Dead March” is played, on the second
two bars, and on the third the whole of the first part once through.
This ends the ceremony, and the band marches out, and forms in front of
the firing party, stepping off with them at quick march, playing tunes
on the way home, as on ordinary parade. In the case of Volunteer
funerals, however, where local sentiment might be roused by such a
custom, the band usually marches home in silence.

There are often striking incidents at military funerals which are not
pre-arranged. At the battle of Fort-Rohya, in India, in April, 1858,
General Hope, of Pinkie, and of the 93rd Highlanders, was killed. At the
funeral his body was wrapped in a Highland plaid and accompanied to the
grave by the pipers of the 42nd, 78th, 79th, and 93rd, playing the
“Flowers of the Forest.” This action, it may be added, was the first
occasion after the battle of Waterloo on which these four regiments met
in active service, and the incident of General Hope’s death and funeral
made it all the more memorable.

In military circles, when pipers play round the officers’ mess, they
generally start at some considerable distance outside, usually in an
adjoining room or the open air, the object of this being that the
strains of the instrument may be heard as coming from a distance. After
finishing inside, the performers play to and wind up where they started
from. The usual procedure may not in strict detail be the same in all
Highland or Scottish regiments, but it is something like the following:—
The men assemble at the appointed place under their pipe-major, who, on
a given order, arranges his men and starts the tune (a march),
everything being pre-arranged. When all is steady he turns to his right
or left, the others marching in Indian file into the mess-room, round
which they go two or three times, afterwards forming up behind the
senior officer’s chair, when they change into strathspey and reel. When
they stop the pipe-major receives a glass of “mountain dew,” with which
he drinks the company’s health, the toast being usually given in Gaelic.
After this he starts another march round the table and then out. All
obstacles, animate or inanimate, must be kept out of the leading piper’s
path. If not he may sometimes find himself in an awkward case. He may
have stairs to go up and come down, corners to turn, doors to pass
through which are too low for the drones, projecting pegs and all sorts
of things to negotiate. The following are a few instances of the
difficulties of pipers in such positions:—

The first is in regards to playing in file, which is generally
acknowledged to be the most difficult formation in which pipers can be
placed. This will become apparent when notice is taken of the fact that
the drones of the player immediately in front drown to a considerable
degree the sound of the player’s chanter. It is therefore only by
listening carefully to the different parts of the tune, and watching the
marching swing of the pipers in front, as well as keeping the regular
step, that one can decide whether the performers are adept players or
not, and, as efficient pipers know, such performances require long
practice and confidence. Then it sometimes happens that a central piper
wanders into the wrong part, thus knocking the pipers in front and
behind completely out. There at once ensues a stampede, so to say, no
one being able to detect who the erring piper is. This is one of the
occasions when the pipe-major looks ferocious, for, being in front, he
is powerless to rectify matters, and is compelled to march on and listen
to the row. The discordant notes will, of course, continue unless the
defaulters and others who are “put out” have confidence enough to stop
and catch up the tune at its proper place. Failing this, the pipe-
major’s only alternative is to form up his men behind the senior
officer’s chair as quickly as possible, and at once strike into the next
tune in his programme. Blunders of this sort, it is only right to state,
are usually committed by nervous men or beginners, but seldom through
carelessness. Again, when pipers are performing this duty, waiters who,
in the exercise of their own functions, are eager to serve their guests,
often bump against or unintentionally obstruct the pipe-major. In some
cases the chanter is knocked out of his hand, thus causing a temporary
derangement as the pipers swing round in their course. Pipers are
sometimes called upon to go into queer places. For instance, let us take
the huts at Aldershot and elsewhere. Here the pipers start from the
outside or from the kitchen, and wend their way round corners and
through very narrow and low doors, which necessitate their marching in a
crouching position in order to prevent the big drone coming in contact
with the top of the door. As they enter the mess-room, they are
invariably obstructed by the inevitable draught-screen, which some one
has neglected to draw aside at the proper time. “Through an obstruction
of this kind,” writes a pipe-major of one of the Highland regiments, “an
accident happened to myself on the first occasion that I, as a pipe-
major, went round the table to play a pibroch in my regiment. I started
in an adjoining room, and as I entered the mess-room door, immediately
behind the draught-screen, the latch caught the ribbons of the outside
drone and pulled the pipes off my shoulder. This caused me to make a few
‘boberechims,’ and I stopped. This being my maiden tune as pipe-major in
my new regiment, a sudden suspicion seemed to seize the officers, who
promptly sent out the mess, sergeant to see and report what state I was
in. After my explanation, which was regarded as satisfactory, I
restarted my tune, for the playing of which the officers indicated their
approval.”




                              CHAPTER XI.
                      THE PIPER AS A MAN OF PEACE.

              “Dear to the Lowland reaper,
                And plaided mountaineer—
              To the cottage and the castle
                The Scottish pipes are dear—
              Sweet sounds the ancient pibroch
                O’er mountain, loch, and glade;
              But the sweetest of all music
                The pipes at Lucknow played.”
                                              —_Whittier._

  Clan pipers—Chief’s retinue—At weddings—Pipers prohibited—In sorrow—At
    funerals—Queen Victoria’s funeral—To lighten labour—The harvest
    dance—The shepherd’s pipe—In church architecture—In church services—
    As a call to church—Ministers and the pipes—Falling into disrepute—
    “As proud as a piper”—Jealousy of the old masters—“As fou as a
    piper”—An Irish piper.


The pipers of old were hereditary pipers, and lived from generation to
generation in the family of the chief who ruled their clan. They were
trained from childhood to the use of the pipes, and grew up as retainers
of the family, whose services no chief would dare to dispense with. They
were often sent by their employers to the great masters of Highland
music for instruction, and when they were old they acted as mediums
through which all that was best in Celtic lore and music was passed down
to future generations. The piper was, in the days of his splendour, a
living exhibition of his clan’s glory and greatness. Every chief had a
piper. “It’s a poor estate,” said the piper of Glengarry, in 1801, to a
lady who asked him why he did not work some in his leisure time, “that
cannot keep the laird and piper without working.” Not only was the piper
not expected to work; he had lands for his support, and was of superior
rank to the other members of his chief’s retinue or “tail.” He
accompanied his chief everywhere, and with the harper—when there were
harpers—had a right to appear at all public meetings. The “tail” of a
chief of the old time was rather an interesting company. Its
composition, according to Sir Walter Scott, was as follows:—

  The henchman, or right hand man.

  The _filidh_ or bard.

  The _bleadaire_ or orator, whose duty it was to make harangues to the
  great folks his chief visited.

  The _gille-mor_ or armourer, who carried his sword, target, and gun.

  The _gille-casfhliuch_, who carried the chief on his back over the
  brooks.

  The _gille-comshreang_, who led his chief’s horse in difficult paths.

  The _gille-truisernis_, who carried his knapsack.

  The _piobair_ or piper.

  The _gille-piobair_ or piper’s man, who carried the pipes; with
  probably a dozen lads besides, who were always ready to do the bidding
  of their chief.

The chief of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries had a retinue twice
as large as that of the chief of the degenerate eighteenth century.
Besides those named, he had his gentlemen of the house, his harper, his
_seneschal_, his treasurer, his standard-bearer, his jester, his body
guard, his quartermaster, his cup-bearer, and his forester, all with
clearly defined duties and rights. The offices of piper, standard-
bearer, harper, cup-bearer, and treasurer descended from father to son.
These “tails” were indeed so formidable that they were at last
prohibited from appearing in Edinburgh.

In 1809, out of all the big retinue, only the piper remained. He remains
still, not exactly as a clan piper—where there are no clans there cannot
be clan pipers—but as an appendage to families having a Highland
lineage, and to many that have but the remotest connection with the
Highlands. His duties are still pretty much what they were. He has not
now a _gille_, for the piper of those days is not too proud to carry his
pipes himself, but the description written in the early years of the
century is still partly applicable to pipers at houses where the
Highland traditions are reverenced:—

  “In a morning when the chief is dressing, he walks backwards and
  forwards close under the window without doors, playing on his bagpipe,
  with a most upright attitude and majestic stride. It is a proverb in
  Scotland, namely, the stately stride of the piper. When required he
  plays at meals, and in the evening to divert the guests with music
  when the chief has company with him. His gilley holds the pipe till he
  begins, and the moment he has done with the instrument he disdainfully
  throws it down upon the ground, as being only the passive means of
  conveying his skill to the ear, and not a proper weight for him to
  carry or bear at other times. But for a contrary reason his gilley
  snatches it up, which is that the pipe may not suffer indignity from
  its neglect.”

The last half of the paragraph is not applicable, and never was. One
might as well expect a professional violinist to throw down his
instrument on the stage after playing a solo, leaving the fragments for
a super to pick up. Pipers respect the bagpipe as much as other
musicians respect their own peculiar instruments, and they were never so
“daft” as to indulge in the antics described by this writer. But then,
the writer was an Englishman, and may therefore be excused.

[Illustration:

  DANCING TO PIPE MUSIC

  (_Highland Dress with Belted Plaid._)
]

The piper was a professional gentleman, a skilled musician, who went to
college, and had a seat at the table with his chief. As a favoured
retainer, he enjoyed certain perquisites. When, for instance, an animal
was slaughtered for the family of the chief, a certain part of the
carcase was allotted to the piper. When the civil wars broke up the clan
system, the chiefs ceased to keep hereditary pipers, and the race soon
became extinct. Afterwards, when a man considered he had enough of this
world’s goods to warrant the expenditure, and felt that he would like to
hark back a little to the ways of the fathers, he got the best piper he
could, just as he got any other servant. In this way the system of
family pipers is perpetuated, and will be so as long as the Sovereign
and others of high rank set the example.

The pipes took an important part in the enjoyments of Highlanders. They
were always to the front at weddings or where the people were making
merry. An old time poet puts it plainly, if rather quaintly, when he
says:—

                 “A braithel where the broth was fat,
                 In ancient times a token sure,
                 The bridegroom was na reckoned poor;
                 A vast o’ fouk a’ roun about
                 Came to the feast then dined thereout,
                 Twa pair o’ pipers playing gade
                 About the table as they fed.”

Our present day equivalent for this verse is much better rhyme, if
farther from the truth:—

                   “At the wedding of Shon Mac Lean,
                   ’Twas wet and windy weather,
                   Yet through the wind and rain
                   Cam twenty pipers together!
                   Erach and Dugald Dhu,
                   Sandy of Isla, too,
                   Each with his bonnet of blue,
                   And every piper was fou,
                     Twenty pipers together.”

The pipers, however, could not have been very “fou,” at least until
after the wedding, for,

                 “The twenty pipers at break of day
                 In twenty different bog-holes lay,
                 Serenely sleeping on their way
                   From the wedding of Shon Mac Lean.”

Had they been totally incapable they could hardly have got to twenty
different “bog-holes.” It is difficult to define exactly the meaning of
the phrases, “as drunk as a piper” and “as fou as a piper,” but they
seem to have generally meant half seas over, not helplessly inebriated.
The piper, being an important social personage, could hardly escape the
reproach of being addicted to liquor, although there is nothing to show
that his class were in this respect any worse than the average of the
people of their day.

[Illustration:

  HIGHLAND FAMILY PARTY RETURNING FROM A FAIR AFTER A DANCE—_Sketched
    from Nature. 1829._
]

That the piper was a principal character at weddings in old times is
certain. The wedding morn was ushered in by the music of the pipers, who
followed the bridegroom and his friends on a round of early calls
intended to warn the guests of their engagements. These joined the
party, and before the circuit, which sometimes occupied several hours,
had ended, some hundreds perhaps had gathered. The bride made a similar
tour round her friends, and thus the complete company was collected.
After the wedding a procession was formed, and with flags flying and
pipers playing, and all kinds of demonstrations of joy, passed through
the neighbourhood. Festivities were generally prolonged to a late hour,
the pipers never ceasing their playing. The company danced either
outside to the music of the pipes or inside to that of the fiddle. The
Irish bagpipe was long used at festivities in Erin, and at a wedding the
hat was sent round three times, the first twice for the priest and the
third time for the piper. The piper did not always, however, lead to
peace and goodwill at weddings, for at one time the ecclesiastical
ordinances of Scotland interposed to prohibit the presence of above
“fifteine persons on both sydes” at marriage feasts, among whom there
were to be “no pypers.” These ordinances were frequently made, and in
connection with one it is on record that “still their chief delight at
marriages was bagpipes, and home they go with loud bagpipes and dance
upon the green.”

The bagpipe joined in the sorrow as well as the mirth of the people. The
coronach, a wailing recitation which recapitulated the good deeds of the
deceased, came most immediately after death, and corresponded to the old
ecclesiastical dirge and the Irish “keen” of the present day. The
laments on the pipes were performed after the coronach, and accompanied
the progress of the obsequies, a number of pipers attending the funeral
of any eminent person. The coronach and the lament existed
contemporaneously for some time, but gradually the coronach died out.
The use of the pipes continued for many years later, more especially in
the Lochaber district and also in Aberdeenshire. At a funeral in Skye of
a notable chief the procession was two miles in length, six men walking
abreast. Seven pipers were in attendance, and, placed at different
positions in the procession, played the lament all the way from the
residence of the deceased to the cemetery, and “upwards of three hundred
imperial gallons of whisky were provided for the occasion, with every
other necessary refreshment.” In these days a funeral was a funeral.

There was a burial in Inverness in the seventeenth century where few
besides Highlanders in their usual garb were present, and all the way
before them a piper played, having his drones hung with streamers of
crape. In 1737 at the funeral of an eminent performer in Ireland his
cortege was preceded by “eight couple of pipers” playing a funeral
dirge, and it is alleged that when Lord Lovat was condemned for
participating in the rebellion of 1745, he desired that his body might
be carried to Scotland for burial, saying “he had once made it a part of
his will that all the pipers between Johnnie Groat’s House and Edinburgh
should be invited to play at his funeral.” Rob Roy’s funeral in 1736 was
the last for many years at which a piper occupied an official position,
although we read that in 1820 the pipes were played at the funeral of
Sir John Murray Macgregor, of Lanrick, and that in Edinburgh in 1835 a
Highland corps attended the funeral of a sergeant, the piper playing
“Lochaber no more.” In later years, however, the custom has been
revived, and the piper now frequently accompanies military funerals or
the funerals of those connected with the Highlands. When the then Sirdar
entered Khartoum after the Battle of Omdurman, one of the first things
he did was to hold a formal funeral service on the spot where General
Gordon was murdered, the pipers playing a dirge and the Soudanese band
playing the hero’s favourite hymn, “Abide with me.” In old times, if the
poet Dunbar may be believed, the bagpipe was preferred to other forms of
honouring the dead:—

                   “I will na preistis for me sing,
                   Na yit na bellis for me ring,
                   Bot a bag pipe to play a spryng.”

In connection with funerals it only remains to be added that at the
magnificent ceremonial in February last (1901), when the body of Queen
Victoria was conveyed from Osborne to Windsor, Her Majesty’s two
Highland pipers had an honourable place in the procession. When the
cortege left Osborne they played the dirge of the Black Watch, and later
on they changed into “The Flowers of the Forest,” a tune that has been
played over many a soldier’s grave. It was appropriate that the
association of the Queen with the 42nd Royal Highlanders should be kept
up to the last. In 1854, when the regiment was in Chobham Camp, Her
Majesty and the Prince Consort visited them weekly, and the Queen was so
pleased with the Highlanders that when she decided to have a piper, she
chose Pipe-major Ross of the 42nd, who remained in her service until his
death about ten years ago. Mr. James C. Campbell, the present royal
pipe-major, was taken from the same regiment.

The bagpipe was also used to lighten labour. While the inhabitants of
Skye were engaged in making roads in 1786, each party of workers had a
piper, and in the North of Scotland men engaged in work requiring
strength and unity of purpose, such as launching a large boat, had a
piper to help them pull or lift together. In the harvest time a piper
was often employed to animate the reapers, keeping them working in time
to the music, like a file of soldiers, he himself following behind the
slowest worker. This custom is alluded to in Hamilton’s elegy on Habbie
Simpson, the piper of Kilbarchan:—

                 “Or wha will cause our shearers shear?
                 Wha will bend up the brags of weir?”

The dance of the kirn or harvest home was always danced with peculiar
glee by the reapers of the farm where the harvest was first finished. On
these occasions they danced on an eminence in full view of as many other
reapers as possible, to the music of the Lowland bagpipe, commencing the
dance with loud shouts of triumph and tossing their hooks in the air.
The dance was retained for a time by Highlanders visiting the South of
Scotland as harvesters, but it has now been more than a century in
disuetude. In a poem of great antiquity, called _Cockilby’s Sow_, which
describes such a dance, we are told that—

                       “Davy Doyte of the dale,
                       Was thair mad menstrale,
                       He blew on a pype he
                       Maid of a borit bourtre.”

Also that—

                         “Olarus the lang clype
                         Playit on a bag pype.”

In a manuscript of the seventeenth century, a song descriptive of
shepherd life says—

           “The life of a shepherd is void of all care,
           With his bag and his bottle he maketh good fare;
           He hath yon green meadow to walk in at will-a,
           With a pair of fine bagpipes upon a green hill-a;
           Tringdilla, tringdilla, tring down-adown dilla,
           With a pair of fine bagpipes upon a green hill-a.”

It may sound irreverent to connect the bagpipe with religious
ordinances, though why one form of musical instrument should be deemed
sacred and another profane is a hard question. To the modern Highlander
a blast from the pipes on Sunday would be considered enough to bring a
curse on the whole land, but our forefathers were not all so strict.
They worked references to the pipes into the architecture of many of
their churches, particularly in England and on the Continent. In St.
James’s Church, Norwich, there used to be a window on which a piper was
shown with a bagpipe with one drone; under a stall in Ripon Cathedral
there is carved in oak a representation of two hogs dancing to a third
playing on a bagpipe; in Beverley Minster, a group of pigs is carved in
wood, all dancing round a trough to the music of one of their number,
who plays a bagpipe having two drones and one chanter; among the
numerous carvings in Westminster Abbey, there is a woodland scene
representing a group of monkeys along with a bear, the latter playing
the bagpipe; and in St. John’s Church, Cirencester, a monkey is depicted
playing on the bagpipe. Then at Rosslyn and in Melrose Abbey, we have
the pieces of architecture mentioned in a previous chapter.[9] Perhaps
the most curious of these semi-ecclesiastical carvings is a
representation of an ass playing on a bagpipe, which is graven on an
ancient tombstone in the Cathedral Church of Hamburg. The animal walks
on its hind legs, holding the instrument between its forelegs, and
carved on the stone are the words—

Footnote 9:

  See pages 37 and 45.

               “The vicissitudes of the world compel me,
               Poor ass, to learn the bagpipe.”

Pipers, apparently, were not rich then more than they are now.

It is difficult to understand why sculptors should have connected sacred
architecture with animals in the way they did. Artists, like poets, have
a license, but this hardly accounts for their associating the pig, which
never was venerated in any way, with sacred things. The carvings,
however, while hardly respectful to the instrument, associate it, if
only in a sarcastic way, with ecclesiastical affairs, and show that the
foolish prejudice which considers the pipes profane did not always
exist. It is possible that the connection between the pipes and churches
was confined to ecclesiastical carvings, but as to that we cannot now
speak definitely. The early reformers in their reforming zeal practised
vandalism, and in rooting out the religion they wished to supersede,
they left us but fragments of an architecture we would now have been
glad to preserve. The references to the bagpipe in churches are so
fragmentary it is impossible to draw any very reliable inference.

The pipes have, however, been associated with religious services on a
good many occasions. The Italian shepherds, when visiting Rome to
celebrate the Nativity, carry their pipes with them, and play to images
of the Virgin Mary and the infant Messiah, which are placed at the
corners of the streets. The pipes were used in the services of the
Catholic Church in Edinburgh in 1536. In 1556 there was a procession in
Edinburgh in honour of St. Giles, the patron saint of the town. The
procession was led by the Queen Regent and was attended by bagpipers.
When James I. came to Scotland in 1617, he did not take the organ from
Holyrood chapel, when he was clearing out every other symptom of
idolatry, because “there is some affinity between it and the bagpipes.”
“I know a priest,” says an old English writer, “who, when any of his
friends should be marryed, would take his back-pype and so fetch them to
church, playing sweetlye afore them, and then he would lay his
instrument handsomely upon the aultare till he had marryed them, and
sayd masse, which thyng being done, he would gentylle bring them home
agayne with back-pype.”

Then we have Dunbar, in his _Testament of Mr. Andro Kennedy_, throwing
some light on the manners and customs of the Carrick district of
Ayrshire, when he makes a brother churchman, with whom he held poetic
jousts, desire that no priest may sing over his grave:—

                  “Bot a bag pipe to play a spryng,
                    _Et unum ail wosp ante me_,
                  In stayd of baneris for to bring,
                    _Quatuor lagenas ceruisie_.
                  Within the graif to set sic thing,
                    _In modum crucis juxta me_,
                  To fle the fendis than hardely sing,
                    _De terra plasmasti me_.”[10]

Footnote 10:

  Scottish Text Society’s version.

So the poet knew the sound of the “bag pipe,” and thought it an
instrument fit to “fie the fendis.” Here some lowlanders would, no
doubt, be willing to agree with him.

We have at least one instance, and that from the far north, of the pipes
being used to call people to church. In that corner of Caithness in
which John o’ Groat’s House is situated there lived, more than two
hundred years ago, a parish minister named Rev. Andrew Houston, or
Hogston. Mr. Houston somehow could not get his people to attend church,
and at last he decided to invoke the aid of the pipes. Accordingly, each
Sabbath morning, a short time previous to the hour of service, a piper
began at one of the more outlying portions of the parish and played his
way to the church. The plan worked well, for the people, attracted by
the novelty, followed the music Sabbath after Sabbath, and thus the
minister gathered together a good congregation. This Mr. Houston was the
first Protestant minister of the parish, and there is a tradition to the
effect that not only did he use the pipes for the purpose mentioned, but
that after the close of the service he allowed his congregation to have
a game at shinty before going home. There is a large headstone to his
memory in the kirkyard of his parish. It bears a Latin inscription and
the date 1620.

In our own day the most notable instance of the pipes in church was at
the first commemoration service held in York Minster in memory of the
Duke of Clarence and Avondale. The 1st Royal Scots were stationed in
York at the time, and three pipers, under the leadership of Pipe-Major
Matheson—a Golspie man—played selections of Highland music inside the
Cathedral. The King’s Own Scottish Borderers relieved the Royal Scots,
their pipers playing “The Flowers of the Forest.” Afterwards the pipers
of the Black Watch played.

The late Rev. Dr. George Mackay, of the Free Church, Inverness, was a
man of a humorous disposition, and after referring one Sunday in an
adverse manner to a proposal to introduce instrumental music into the
church, said that if they (the congregation) were obliged to fall back
upon a “human instrument” to aid them in the service of praise, they
would have nothing to do with the organ—it was an instrument of foreign
manufacture—they would use the bagpipe. What was more appropriate than
that Highland people should use a Highland instrument? Some time later,
when the question of instrumental music was being discussed at Inverness
Free Church Presbytery, the Doctor, with a twinkle in his eye, turned to
an elder who was a member of Presbytery, and who in his younger days was
known to play the pipes occasionally, and asked him, “Could you let us
have ‘French’ on the bagpipe?” The elder, however, was an austere
individual, and, with an attempt at a smile, he replied, “Yes, and
‘Balerma’ too, doctor; but when I want to sing God’s praises, I use my
own pipe.”

This antipathy towards their national music, showed itself very
frequently among the “unco guid” of the Highlands. Two ministers in the
north of Scotland were going along a country road in a gig towards a
town where the following day was to be Communion Sunday. While on their
way they heard the sound of pipe music in a field near a roadside
cottage. They stopped the gig, and after listening intently to the notes
of a pibroch, one of the good men jumped out, walked up to the piper,
told him he was quite wrong with the tune, and said that if he (the
piper) would lend him his pipes he would show him how the pibroch should
be played. The piper, with some astonishment, consented, when the
minister struck up the tune, and went through it in such a masterly
manner that the piper was fairly overcome with delight, and thanked his
reverend tutor. During the time the performance was going on the other
minister sat in the carriage, quite horrified to see and hear what his
fellow-traveller was about. When the piper minister returned to proceed
on the journey, the other began a sermon on the wickedness of his
conduct. The former replied that on hearing the piper perform he thought
it his duty to correct him, as otherwise the false notes would be
running in his head during the sermon, but now that he had played the
tune he would think no more about it, and be able to preach a good
sermon on the morrow.

In this connection it is only fair to ministers to add that they were
generally not nearly so prejudiced as their people, especially their
elders, were. Elders nearly always professed more religious knowledge
than ministers, and were always less tolerant of what did not agree with
their own opinions. In one Highland parish not quite a hundred years
ago, a few people set themselves up as judges of what was right and
wrong, and let the exercise of their powers become such that a young man
learning to play the pipes laid himself open to exclusion from church
privileges. Happily we are long past that stage now.

There is no denying, however, that at one time the race fell into
disrepute. In _Cockilby’s Sow_, a poem already referred to,[11] the
bagpipe is mentioned as appropriated to swine herds, and in 1641 a
sarcastic writer tells us, “The troopers rode from citie to court and
from court to country with their trumpets before them, which made the
people run out to see them, as fast as if it had been the bagge-pype
playing before the Beares.”

Footnote 11:

  See page 155.

Rather a nasty allusion that to the bagpipe and the bears. It reminds us
of the dancing bear, or the organ and the monkey of our own day.
Whatever the piper might think of himself, people seemed disposed to
think the worst of him, and innumerable petty offences were laid to his
charge. In 1570 three St. Andrews pipers were admonished to keep the
Sabbath day holy, to attend sermon, and to abstain from playing on the
streets after supper or during the night. Playing and dancing on Sunday
came so often under clerical censure as to show very plainly the general
use of the instrument on the one hand, and on the other its adoption in
connection with dancing, particularly in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh.

In 1574 a great complaint was made by a burgess of Stirling to the Privy
Council of an assault “by are namit Edmond Broun, are Highland piper,”
when bit to the effusion of blood “by the said pyperis dog.” In 1591 and
1593 George Bennet, piper in the Water of Leith, and James Brakenrig,
agreed to abstain from playing on the bagpipes on Sunday; in 1595 and
1596 Thomas Cairns, following the same vocation there, fell under
displeasure for playing and dancing on Sunday; and William Aiken pledged
himself never to profane the Sabbath day again with the pipes. In 1598
“Duncan Ure and Johnne Forbes, pyper,” were sentenced to imprisonment,
and to be fed on bread and water, on confessing that they had sat up all
night “playing at the dys quhill iiij hours in the morning,” when they
quarrelled. In 1606 Richard Watsone, piper in the Water of Leith, was
threatened with censure, and in 1624 James Clark was “fined of xxsh. for
having an pyper playing in his house in tyme of sermon, vpoun the Lord
his Sabbath.” “William Wallace, pyper,” was sentenced by the kirk
session of St. Cuthbert’s “to stand for one day upon the pillar, and
thereafter to remove furth of the parochine, ay an quhill he be ane
renewit man of his manneris, and to get lief of presbyterie to retourne,
after they sie amendiment in his lyf and conversatioun,” and in Galloway
there is still the “great well of Larg,” of which it is said a piper
stole the offering, but when he was drinking ale, which he intended to
pay for with the stolen money, the gout seized on him, of which he could
not be cured but at that well and after he had restored the money.

At length the immoralities of the humble musicians became a bye-word, so
much so that a slanderous biographer of Archbishop Sharpe thought he had
blackened his character enough when he said, “As for his father, he was
a piper.” There was nothing to be said after that. So late as 1860, a
traveller in Caithness-shire who visited Brawl Castle, one of the county
seats, wrote, more let us hope in joke than in earnest—“John Gunn, their
piper, played extremely well, but it was sometimes necessary to station
him in a distant room, as the skirl was a little too harsh to be enjoyed
at close quarters, particularly when John made too free with whisky,
without which, however, it was not easy to get John to play at all.”

Gambling, ebriety, nocturnal revels, and gross immoralities, says the
author of _Musical Memoirs of Scotland_, accompanied this subordinate
species of music, to the manifest annoyance of the more tranquil part of
the community, and even then (1849) where frequent in towns,
licentiousness was seldom far removed from it. In 1661 the minister of a
Scottish parish has left it on record, “he found two women of his
congregation ‘full’ on a week day, and dancing with pipers playing to
them.” Truly a severe indictment.

From these things it is refreshing to turn to the story of William Mac
Donald of Badenoch, who played so well, even when rivals had given him
too much drink, that he always got a prize at competitions. His son was
piper to the Prince of Wales, but owing to religious scruples he
resigned his situation and burned his pipes. He evidently did not think
there was anything sacred about the instrument.

The evil that men do lives after them. So these stories derogatory to
pipers have been preserved while many equally good and reflecting credit
on their characters as public men have no doubt been buried with their
bones. They always had a “guid conceit o’ themselves,” and were apt to
think they were better than average humanity, so much so that “as proud
as a piper” passed into a proverb. When the late Duke of Edinburgh
required a piper he asked the advice of the Prince of Wales’s piper as
to how he should get one. The Prince’s piper asked the Duke what kind of
a piper he wanted, whereupon the Duke said “Oh, just a piper like
yourself, Donald.” “Oh, it’s easy to get a piper,” said Donald, “but
it’s no easy to get a piper like me.” Then there was Mac Donel, the
famous Irish piper, who lived in great style, keeping servants and
horses. One day he was sent for to play to a large company during
dinner, and a table and chair were placed for him on the landing outside
the door, a bottle of claret and a glass on the table and a servant
waiting behind the chair. Mac Donel appeared, took a rapid survey of the
preparations, filled his glass, stepped to the dining room door, looked
full in the midst of the gathering, said “Mr. Grant your health, and
company,” drank off the dram, threw half-a-crown on the table with the
remark to the servant, “There, my lad, is two shillings for my bottle of
wine and a sixpence for yourself,” then ran out, mounted his horse and
galloped off, followed by his groom. An almost similar story is told of
_Ian Dall_, the Gairloch piper, but in his case the language used was
hardly so choice. It was of the kind which is best represented
thus * * * *

Not only were the old masters proud, they were also jealous. When the
colleges for training pipers were in Skye, the Mac Crimmons had some
private “tips” on pipe music which they did not give away to their
pupils. A girl friend, however, learned how some of the secret notes
were produced, and in private she taught her sweetheart. When her
nearest relatives learned what she had done, they instantly cut off her
fingers that she might show no more how they practised their tunes.
Ross, a grand old Breadalbane piper, in a mad fit of jealousy, thrust
the right hand of his boy brother into the fire, and held it there till
it became a charred lump, to prevent the boy becoming a better piper
than himself, which seemed likely. Neil Munro’s story of _Red Hand_ is
but a variation of the same theme. Giorsal, jealous of her stepson
Tearlach’s piping being better than that of her husband, cuts off
Tearlach’s hand while he sleeps. It is beautifully told, but that is the
whole story.

And they have always been a happy lot who could enjoy themselves to the
utmost with pipe and music and song and dance, and also perhaps with
some of the national beverage of Scotland, which is still rather
unfairly coupled with the tartan and the pipes. When the Princess of
Thule came back to the Lewis, John the Piper was told—“Put down your
pipes, and tek off your bonnet, and we will have a good dram together
this night! And it is Sheila herself will pour out the whisky for you,
John, and she is a good Highland girl, and she knows the piper was
neffer born that could be hurt by whisky. And the whisky was never made
that could hurt a piper.” This, too, passed into a proverb—“As fou as a
piper”—but however true it may have been in one generation it has
nowadays no more than a figurative meaning. Pipers now are as much in
the public eye as ever they were, but they are matter-of-fact people,
who have their livings to make and their characters to uphold. They are
therefore neither over proud, over jealous, nor over jolly. They have
fitted themselves into nineteenth century circumstances, and do not care
how much the public eye is upon them.

The piper as a man of peace has been and still is closely concerned with
every side of the social life of the Highland people, but his name is
not writ nearly so large on history’s page as is that of the piper as a
man of war. In _Whistlebinkie_ we have verses by Alex. A. Ritchie, which
illustrate the attachment of the Irish piper to his pipes, and which,
for lack of a better opening, may be inserted here. They are too good to
leave out altogether:—

     “Ould Murphy the Piper lay on his deathbed,
     To his only son Tim, the last words he said,
     ‘My eyes they grow dim, and my bosom grows could,
     But ye’ll get all I have, Tim, when I slip my hould,
     Ye’ll get all I have, boy, when I slip my hould.

     “‘There’s three cows and three pigs, and three acres of land,
     And this house shall be yours, Tim, as long as ’twill stand;
     All my fortune is threescore bright guineas of gould,
     An ye’ll get all I have, Tim, when I slip my hould,
     Ye’ll get all I have, Tim, when I slip my hould.

     “‘Go fetch me my pipes, Tim, till I play my last tune,
     For death is coming, he’ll be here very soon;
     Those pipes I have played on, ne’er let them be sould,
     If you sell all I have, Tim, when I slip my hould,
     If you sell all I have, Tim, when I slip my hould.’

     “Then ould Murphy the Piper, wid the last breath he drew,
     He played on his pipes like an Irishman true,
     He played up the anthem of Green Erin so bould—
     Then calmly he lay down and so slipt his hould!
     Then gently he lay down and slipt his last hould.”

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER XII.
                     THE BURGH PIPERS OF SCOTLAND.

           “The piper cam to our toun,
           To our toun, to our toun;
           The piper cam to our toun,
               And he play’d bonnilie;
           He play’d a spring the laird to please,
           A spring brent new frae yont the seas,
           And then he ga’e his bags a squeeze,
               And play’d anither key.
           And wasna he a roguey, a roguey, a roguey;
           And wasna he a roguey, the piper o’ Dundee.”
                                           —_Old Scots Song._

  Royal pipers—In France—At the English court—The Edinburgh Piper—
    Dumbarton—Biggar—Wigtown—Glenluce—Dumfries—Linlithgow—Aberdeen—
    Perth—Keith—Dalkeith—Dundee—Peebles—A weird story—Falkirk—
    “Gallowshiels” pipers’ combat—The Hasties of Jedburgh—Habbie Simson
    of Kilbarchan—Bridgeton—Neil Blane of Lanark—The Piper of
    Northumberland.


Although as a clan musician the piper was to a large extent a public
character, he was quite as public in one or two other capacities. There
were semi-royal pipers, and there were burgh pipers. We have not much
record of the former, that is, until our own day, when the piper is one
of the principal personages in the Royal retinue—but we have plenty of
the latter. In 1505, we read, “pipers on drones” shared of the royal
bounty of James IV.; and we have various references to pipers in
connection with Court ceremonials. In France the piper was an appendage
of the royal household in the seventeenth century, and in Ben Jonson’s
_Irish Masque_, performed at the Court of England in 1613, six men and
six boys danced to the bagpipe. But there is nothing to show that the
piper in olden days formed part of the regular following of Scottish
sovereigns. Pipers were kept by English noblemen, but their instrument
was not the Highland. It was as burgh pipers that they were best known
in a public capacity, in the Lowlands of Scotland at any rate. Each
burgh had one or two, and the office, like that of clan piper, was in
many cases hereditary. The pipers were supported out of the public funds
along with other minstrels. Here is Rev. James Mac Kenzie’s description
of the relation of the piper to a burgh, given in his _History of
Scotland_:—

[Illustration:

  (_From Drawings by J. Sands. By permission of Messrs. J. & R. Glen,
    Edinburgh._)
]

  “The folk of the old town are fond of music. We have minstrels who
  hold a life appointment in the service of the burgh; their instruments
  are bagpipes, to be sure. Evening and morning and at other times
  needful the pipers march through the town to refresh the lieges with
  ‘Broken Bones at Luncarty,’ ‘Port Lennox,’ ‘Jockie and Sandy,’ ‘St.
  Johnstone’s Hunt’s up,’ and the like inspiriting strains. The law of
  the burgh requires that the pipers ‘sall have their daily wages and
  meat of the neighbours of this guid toon circulary, conform to the
  auld loveable use.’ Some of the burghers are so lamentably void of
  taste that they count the music dear and grudge the piper his
  ‘reasonable diet circularly.’ Some even refuse to entertain the piper
  when it comes to their turn, and get fined for their pains.”

In 1487 Edinburgh had three public pipers, and the Town Council then
ordained that they should get their food day about from persons of
substance, or that such persons should pay them money equivalent to
threepence per piper. In 1660, after the magistrates had permitted “John
Johnstone, piper, to accompany the town’s drummer throw the town morning
and evening,” they gave him a salary and perquisites, but next year,
rather capriciously, when he applied for a free house during his term of
office, they resolved that he was not required, and dispensed with his
services. About 1505 we have records of public pipers in Dumbarton,
Biggar, Wigton, Glenluce, Dumfries, and elsewhere, and in 1707 we read
the piper of Linlithgow was convicted of immorality and excommunicated.

Aberdeen had its piper, and in 1630 the magistrates prohibited him
playing in the streets. The language of their prohibition was anything
but complimentary. Thus:—“The Magistrates discharge the common piper of
all going through the toun at nycht, or in the morning, in tyme coming,
with his pype—it being an incivill forme to be usit within sic a famous
burghe, and being often found fault with, als weill be sundrie
nichtbouris of the toune as by strangeris.”

The Aberdonians were canny people then as now, but it is wonderful how
their spelling degenerated in the course of one sentence.

Perth had a piper as late as 1831. The piper of the Fair City was in the
habit of playing through the streets at five o’clock in the morning and
at seven at night. The death of the then town piper about the beginning
of the century was much regretted, “the music having an effect in the
morning inexpressibly soothing and delightful.” The custom of early and
late piping was also retained for a long time in Keith.

Old Geordie Syme, the town piper of Dalkeith, was a famous piper in his
day. The exact period when he flourished cannot now be ascertained, and
little is known of him, even in tradition. The piper of Dalkeith was a
retainer of the house of Buccleuch, and there was a small salary
attached to the office, for which in Geordie’s time he had to attend the
family on all particular occasions and make the round of the town twice
daily—at five a.m. and eight p.m. Besides his salary, he had a suit of
clothes allowed him regularly. This consisted of a long yellow coat
lined with red, red plush breeches, white stockings, and buckles in his
shoes. Geordie was much taken notice of by the gentry of his time. It is
not known when he died. His successor in office was Jamie Reid, who
lived long to enjoy the emoluments of the position and about whom there
are some interesting local traditions. Jamie was succeeded by Robert
Lorimer, and at his death his son was installed in his office, which he
held as late as 1837, probably much later. The practice of playing
through the town was discontinued about 1821, the custom being
considered by the inhabitants a useless relic of bygone days. A long
sarcastic poem, printed and circulated about that time, is believed to
have helped greatly to finally abolish the practice.

Dundee got a burgh piper after the Reformation, and his mission was to
call the people to their work in the mornings. “Dressed in the town’s
livery and colours, he played through the burgh every day in the morning
at four hours and every nicht at aucht hours, a service for which every
householder was bound to pay him twelve pennies yearly.”

Pipers were, and perhaps are, a dignified race, but few of them were so
boastful as the piper of Peebles, who, tradition says, tried to blow his
pipes from Peebles to Lauder, a distance of eighteen miles, in a certain
number of blasts. He failed in the attempt, but succeeded in blowing
himself out of breath. The spot where he fell down dead is on the
boundary of the parish of Heriot, in Midlothian, and is still called
“The Piper’s Grave.” This cannot, however, have been the Peebles piper
who was written of in 1793 by William Anderson of Kirriemuir in a long
poem which appeared in _Provincial Poets_. After describing in the
quaint way of eighteenth century writers, the country life of these
days,

                “Fan wives wi’ rocks an’ spindles span,
                An’ brawest lasses us’d nae lawn—
                Fan stiffen wasna sought, nor blue
                To mutches—fan the sarks were few,
                Some had but ane, some had twa,
                An’ money mae had nane ava,
                Fan lasses wi’ their rocks set out
                To are anither night about,”

the author proceeds to tell how a laird near Kinghorn got over head and
ears in debt, and was at his wit’s end to find a way out of his
troubles. At last one evening, as he was wandering alone in the fields,
very much dejected, he was accosted by a fine-looking stranger on a
black horse, who sympathised with him in his difficulties, and, seeming
to know what they were without being told, offered him £10,000 on his
simple note of hand.

                  “Ye’s get it on your single bond,
                  As I frae Scotland maun abscond
                  To France, or in a woody swing
                  For lies a neighbour tald the King—
                  An’ said I meant to tak’ his life,
                  To let a gallant get his wife.”

The laird, with little hesitation, accepted the offer, and, according to
appointment, the stranger called with the money “on the chap o’ twal”
the following night—

                “As muckle goud, and rather mair,
                Than wad out-weigh twal pecks o’ bear.”

He had not time to wait till it was counted, but, assuring the laird
that it was all right, he presented the bond for signature. This,
however, read that after fifteen years the laird should be the
stranger’s servant. But the laird wouldn’t have this:—

                 “As upright folk abhor mischief—
                 As honest men despise a thief—
                 As dogs detest a grunting sow,
                 So laigh the laird disdained to bow!”

And, bursting out with:—

                  “Hence, Satan! to your black abode,
                  In name of my Almighty God!”

he sent the “stranger” right out somewhere through the roof, leaving the
money on the table. The supernatural powers of Scottish mythology never
could stand the name of the Deity.

But the laird had not heard the last of his great enemy. He prospered
and grew richer and richer until, sixteen years after, when, at a feast,
he was called out to speak with a visitor on horseback. A minute after
there was a loud report, the “stranger” lay dead on the ground, and at
the laird’s feet lay a pistol. The laird was lodged in Edinburgh prison
on a charge of murder, but on the doctors examining the body it was
found to have been dead ten days before “it” visited the laird, and that
there was no mark where a bullet could have entered. This created a
great uproar, and the mystery seemed incapable of explanation, until at
last some Peebles folk came to the capital, and swore that the body was
that of their piper:—

                 “I saw him yerdit, I can swear—
                 Frae his lang hame how came he there?”

It was the Peebles piper, better dressed than ever he had been in life,
and he had died in his bed at home. They even identified his “sark” and
the pistol. The laird was liberated, but he in his heart knew quite well
the real explanation of the mystery:—

                “The laird saw syne it had been Nick
                Contriv’d an’ carried on the trick,
                He pu’d the piper frae the moold
                That was in Peebles on him shool’d;
                An’ brought him to the braithel, where
                He left him dead wi’ sic a rair,
                That folk wad sworn they saw him shot
                That very instant on the spot.
                Auld Horny thought to gar him howd
                Upo’ the gallows, for the gowd
                He gat lang syne, an’ wadna set
                His signature to show the debt.
                But in his drift the Devil fail’d—
                The second time the laird prevail’d—
                Liv’d lang at hame, in wealth an’ ease,
                An’ dy’d at last of nae disease,
                But mere auld age—Renown’d his race
                Unto this day possess his place.”

Why the poet should make the Evil One bring the body of a piper from
Peebles to Kinghorn to serve his evil ends is a bit strange; and also
how the Devil had but the two plans for encompassing the ruin of the
laird. However, the poet’s license, especially when coupled with the
supernatural, no doubt accounts for a great deal.

Peebles seems to have had more than its share of pipers. James Ritchie,
who flourished at the beginning of the eighteenth century, as piper to
the Corporation of the town, was told one day by his wife that the flood
in the Tweed had carried away their family cow, the fruit of years of
piping. “Weel, weel,” said the piper, with manly calm, “deil ma care
after a’. It cam’ wi’ the win’, let it gang wi’ the water.” Which is all
the record we have of James.

Pipers were, perhaps still are, a philosophic race, and their music was
always their first thought. The town piper of Falkirk was sentenced to
death for horse-stealing, and on the night before his execution he
obtained, as a special indulgence, the company of some of his brother
pipers. As the liquor was abundant and their instruments in tune, the
fun and music grew fast and furious. The execution was to be at eight
o’clock, and the poor piper was recalled to a sense of his situation by
the morning light dawning on his window. Suddenly silencing his pipes,
he exclaimed, “Oh, but this wearifu’ hanging rings in my lug like a new
tune,” and went out to his fate.

The piper of “Gallowshiels” is known to posterity principally by a poem
entitled _The Maid of Gallowshiels_, in which the piper of the town is
celebrated. The author was Hamilton of Bangour, and the poem tells of a
contest between the piper and the fiddler for the love of the Maid of
Gallowshiels. In the first book the fiddler challenges the piper to a
trial of musical skill, and proposes that the maid herself shall be the
umpire:—

          “‘Sole in her breast the fav’rite youth shall reign
          Whose hand shall wake the sweetest warbled strain,
          And if to me the ill-fated piper yield,
          As sure I trust this well-contested field,
          High in the sacred dome his pipes I’ll raise,
          The trophy of my fame in after days;
          That all may know as they the pipes survey
          The fiddler’s deed and this the signal day.
          But if the Fates, his wishes to fulfil,
          Shall give the triumph to his happier skill,
          My fiddle his, to him be praises paid,
          And join with those the long-contested maid.’
          All Gallowshiels the daring challenge heard,
          Full blank they stood, and for their piper fear’d;
          Fearless alone, he rose in open view,
          And in the midst his sounding bagpipe threw.”

Then the poem tells the history of the competitions, the piper deducing
his origin from Colin of Gallowshiels, who bore the identical bagpipe at
the battle of Harlaw with which he himself was resolved to maintain the
glory of the piper race. The second book commences with the following
exquisite description of the instrument:—

           “Now in his artful hand the bagpipe held,
           Elate the piper wide surveys the field;
           O’er all he throws his quick, discerning eyes,
           And views their hopes and fears alternate rise.
           Old Glenderule, in Gallowshiels long fam’d
           For works of skill, the perfect wonder fram’d;
           His shining steel first lop’d with dex’trous toil,
           From a tall spreading elm, the branchy spoil.
           The clouded wood he next divides in twain,
           And smooths them equal to an oval plane.
           Six leather folds in still connected rows,
           To either plank conformed, the sides compose;
           The wimble perforates the base with care,
           A destined passage op’ning to the air;
           But once inclos’d within the narrow space,
           The opposing valve forbids the backward race.
           Fast to the swelling bag, two reeds combin’d
           Receive the blasts of the melodious wind.
           Round from the turning loom, with skill divine,
           Embossed, the joints in silver circles shine;
           In secret prison pent, the accents lie
           Until his arm the lab’ring artist ply;
           Then, duteous, they forsake their dark abode,
           Fellows no more, and wing a separate road.
           These upwards thro’ the narrow channel glide,
           In ways unseen, a solemn murmuring tide;
           Those through the narrow path their journey bend
           Of sweeter sort, and to the earth descend.
           O’er the small pipe, at equal distance, lie
           Eight shining holes, o’er which his fingers fly.
           From side to side the aerial spirit bounds;
           The flying fingers form the passing sounds,
           That, issuing gently through the polished door,
           Mix with the common air and charm no more.”

The piper confounded his opponent with the dexterity of his performance,
and the fiddler gave up the contest. The maid, however, with the
proverbial fickleness of womankind, gave the preference to the loser,
and went away with him, leaving the piper lamenting his misfortunes.

Sir Walter Scott took a considerable interest in the Border pipers, and
in his introduction to _Border Minstrelsy_ says:—

  “It is certain that till a very late date, the pipers, of whom there
  was one attached to each Border town of note, and whose office was
  often hereditary, were the great depository of oral, and particularly
  poetical tradition. About spring-time, and after harvest it was the
  custom of these musicians to make a progress through a particular
  district of the country. The music and tale repaid their lodging and
  they were usually gratified with a donation of seed corn. This order
  of minstrels is alluded to in the comic song of ‘Maggie Lauder,’ who
  thus addresses a piper—

                        ‘Live ye upo’ the Border?’

  By means of these men, much traditional poetry was preserved which
  must otherwise have perished.”

In another place he says:—

  “These town pipers, an institution of great antiquity upon the
  Borders, were certainly the last remains of the minstrel race. Robin
  Hastie, town piper of Jedburgh, perhaps the last of the order, died
  nine or ten years ago [this was written about 1802]; his family was
  supposed to have held the office for about three centuries. Old age
  had rendered Robin a wretched performer, but he knew several old songs
  and tunes which have probably died with him. The town pipers received
  a livery and salary from the community to which they belonged, and in
  some burghs they had a small allotment of land called ‘the Piper’s
  Croft.’”

One of the statutes passed by the Town Council of Jedburgh was to the
following effect:—

  “The swasher (town drummer) and piper to go duly round at four in the
  morning and eight at night under the penalty of forfeiting their
  wages, and eight days’ imprisonment.”

That the drummer and piper attended to their duties is shown by an
extract from _The Autobiography of a Scottish Borderer_. The writer of
the extract was a Jedburgh lady, who died in 1846, and very probably
either saw or heard of a procession such as she describes:—

  “The bells rung a merry peal and parties paraded the streets, preceded
  by the town piper, with favours in their hats.”

And, continuing, in a bit of glowing dialogue:—

  “‘Walk in, gentlemen, and partake of the cup of joy in my puir
  dwalling,’ quoth Kitty Rutherford as they came down the Burn Wynd,
  ‘the bairns that are unborn will rise up and call ye blessed for this
  day’s wark. Cum in, Watty Boyd, cum in, Rob Hastie, to the kitchen,’”
  etc.

Watty Boyd and Rob Hastie were respectively town drummer and town piper
of Jedburgh.

The “Piper’s House” in Jedburgh was No. 1 Duck Row, at the foot of the
Canongate, and the fact that it was always known by this name goes to
show that it was the house in which the town pipers resided. The Robin
Hastie referred to by Sir Walter Scott is supposed to have occupied the
house, which was altered in 1896 in order to meet modern requirements.

The instrument with which, according to tradition, one of the Jedburgh
pipers, John Hastie by name, played at Flodden, existed till very
lately, perhaps still exists, in the keeping of some antiquarian. That
burgh pipers were, on the Borders, where they rivalled in fame those of
the Highlands, greatly respected, is shown by the _Elegy on John Hasty_,
an excellent dirge which elucidates much of the manners of the Border
pipers. The name of the author is unknown, but as the piece was out of
print before 1730, the piper must have been dead before that time:—

              “O death! thou wreck of young and auld,
              How slie, and O how dreadfu’ bald!
              Thou came unlooked for, nor anes tald
                          What was the crime;
              But Hastie at the mouth turned cald
                          Just at his prime.

              “We mourn the loss o’ mensefu’ John,
              Yet greet in vain since he is gone;
              A blyther lad ne’er buir a drone,
                          Nor touched a lill;
              Nor pipe inspir’d wi’ sweeter tone,
                          Or better skill.

              “Not Orpheus auld, with lyric sound,
              Wha in a ring gard stanes dance round,
              Was ever half so much renown’d
                          For jig and solo—
              Now he lies dum aneath the ground
                          An’ we maun follow.

              “At brydels, whan his face we saw,
              Lads, lasses, bridegroom, bride and a’
              Smiling, cry’d, Johnie come awa’,
                          A welcome guest;
              The enchanting chanter out he’d draw—
                          His pleas’d us best.

              “The spring that ilk are lik’d he kend;
              Auld wives at sixty years wad stend;
              New pith his pipes their limbs did lend,
                          Bewitching reed!
              ‘Las that his winsome sell sou’d bend
                          Sae soon his head.

              “When bagpipes newfangled lugs had tir’d,
              They’d sneer; then he, like are inspir’d,
              We’s fiddle their faggin’ spirits fir’d,
                          Or e’er they wist;
              Gi’ every taste what they desir’d,
                          He never mist.

              “Then with new keenness wad they caper,
              He sliely smudg’d to see them vaper;
              And, if some glakit girl shou’d snapper,
                          He’d gi’ a wink,
              Fie lads, quoth he, had aff, ne’er stap her,
                          She wants a drink.

              “If a young swankie, wi’ his joe,
              In some dark nook play’d bogle-bo,
              John shook his head, and said, why no;
                          Can flesh and blood
              Stand pipe and dance and never show
                          Their metal good.

              “Not country squire, nor lord, nor laird,
              But for John Hasty had regard;
              With minstrels mean he ne’er wad herd;
                          Nor fash his head;
              Now he’s received his last reward—
                          Poor man he’s dead.

              “He hated a’ your sneaking gates,
              To play for bear, for pease, or ates;
              His saul aspir’d to higher fates,
                          O mensefu’ John!
              Our tears come rapping down in spates,
                          Since thou art gone.

              “Whan other pipers steal’d away,
              He gently down his join wad lay:
              Nor hardly wad tak’ hire for play,
                          Sic was his mense!
              We rair aloud the ruefu’ day
                          That took him hence.

              “John, whan he play’d ne’er threw his face,
              Like a’ the girning piper race;
              But set it aff wi’ sic a grace,
                          That pleas’d us a’;
              Now dull and drierie is our case
                          Since John’s awa’.

              “Ilk tune, mair serious or mair gay,
              To humour he had sic a way;
              He’d look precise, and smile and play,
                          As suited best;
              But Death has laid him in the clay—
                          Well may he rest.

              “A fiddle spring he’d let us hear,
              I think they ca’d it “Nidge-nod-near,”
              He’d gi’ a punk, and look sae queer,
                          Without a joke,
              You’d swore he spoke words plain and clear,
                          At ilka stroke.

              “It did ane good to hear his tale,
              O’er a punch bowl, or pint o’ ale;
              Nae company e’er green’d to skaill,
                          If John was by;
              Alas! that sic a man was frail,
                          And born to die.

              “But we his mem’ry dear shall mind,
              While billows rair, or blaws the wind;
              To tak’ him hence Death was no kind—
                          O dismal feed!
              We’ll never sic anither find,
                          Since Johnie’s dead.

              “Minstrels of merit, ilk ane come,
              Sough mournfu’ notes o’er Johnie’s tomb;
              Through fields of air applaud him home—
                          I hope he’s weel;
              His worth, nae doubt, has sav’d him from
                          The muckle de’il.


                              EPITAPH.

              “Here lies dear John, whase pipe and drone,
                And fiddle aft has made us glad;
               Whase cheerfu’ face our feasts did grace—
                A sweet and merry lad.”

The Border pipers were supposed by their countrymen to excel in musical
skill and graceful execution those of the Highlands, and they commanded
a higher degree of respect than wandering musicians. They traversed the
country at particular seasons, chiefly in spring, for the purpose of
collecting seed corn—John Hastie apparently was too dignified for this,
as witness the reference to playing “for bear, for pease, or ates”—and
they were the last remains of the minstrelsy of the Borders. “Like a’
the girning piper race” shows that the pipe then commonly used in
Jedburgh was the Lowland, as that inflated with the mouth prevented
“girning.” Either John played the latter, or he had such command of his
features that he did not allow his music to deprive him of his pleasant
looks.

The village of Kilbarchan, too, had its piper. He was a notable person
in his day, and also proved himself worthy of the attention of the poet.
It was the habit in Kilbarchan for the piper to play a march called “The
Maiden Trace” before a bride as previous to her marriage she walked with
her maidens three times round the church. “Trixie,” in the following
epitaph, which was first printed in 1706, refers to a then popular
song:—

            “The Epitaph of Habbie Simson
              Who on his drone bore bony flags
            He made his cheeks as red as Crimson
              And babbed when, he blew the Bags.

            “Kilbarchan now may say, alas!
            For she hath lost her Game and Grace
            Both Trixie and the Maiden Trace
                        But what remead?
            For no man can supply his place
                        Hab Simson’s dead.

            “Now who shall play, the day it daws?
            Or hunt up, when the Cock he craws?
            Or who can for the Kirk—town—cause,
                        Stand us in stead?
            On Bagpipes (now) no Body blaws
                        Fen Habbie’s dead.

            “Or wha will cause our Shearers shear?
            Wha will bend up the Brags of Weir
            Bring in the Bells or good play meir
                        In time of need?
            Hab Simson could, what needs you speer?
                        But (now) he’s dead.

            “So kindly to his Neighbours neast,
            At Beltan and Saint Barchan’s feast
            He blew and then held up his Breast
                        As he were weid
            But now we need not him arrest
                        For Habbie’s dead.

            “At Fairs he play’d before the Spear-men
            All gaily graithed in their Gear Men,
            Steell Bonnets, Jacks, and Swords so clear then
                        Like any Bead,
            Now wha shall play before such Weir-men
                        Fen Habbie’s dead?

            “At Clarkplays when he wont to come;
            His Pipe played trimly to the Drum
            Like Bikes of Bees he gart it Bum
                        And tun’d his Reed.
            Now all our Pipers may sing dumb
                        Fen Habbie’s dead.

            “And at Horse Races many a day,
            Before the Black, the Brown, the Gray
            He gart his Pipe when he did play,
                        Baith Skirl and Skreed,
            Now all such Pastimes quite away,
                        Fen Habbie’s dead.

            “He counted was a weil’d Wight-man
            And fiercely at Foot-ball he ran;
            At every Game the Gree he wan
                        For Pith and Speed
            The like of Habbie was na than,
                        But now he’s dead.

            “And than besides his valiant Acts
            At Bridals he wan many Placks,
            He bobbed ay behind Fo’ks backs,
                        And shook his Head;
            Now we want many merry Cracks,
                        Fen Habbie’s dead.

            “He was Convoyer of the Bride
            With Kittock hinging at his side;
            About the Kirk he thought a Pride
                        The Ring to lead.
            But now we may gae but a Guide,
                        Fen Habbie’s dead.

            “So well’s he keeped his decorum
            And all the Stots of Whip-meg-morum,
            He slew a Man, and wae’s me for him,
                        And bure the Fead!
            But yet the Man wan hame before him,
                        And was not dead!

            “Ay whan he play’d, the Lasses Leugh,
            To see him Teethless Auld and teugh
            He wan his Pipes beside Borcheugh
                        Withoutten dread;
            Which after wan him Gear enough,
                        But now he’s dead.

            “Ay whan he play’d the Gaitlings gedder’d,
            And whan he spake the Carl bledder’d;
            On Sabbath days his Cap was fedder’d,
                        A seemly Weid.
            In the Kirk-yeard his Mare stood tedder’d
                        Where he lies dead.

            “Alas! for him my Heart is sair,
            For of his Springs I gat a skair,
            At every Play, Race, Feast, and Fair
                        But Guile or Greed
            We need not look for Pyping mair,
                        Fen Habbie’s dead.”

Besides those mentioned, there were other notable performers, who might,
by a slight stretch of language, be called burgh pipers. There was for
instance the Piper of Bridgeton, William Gunn, who published a book of
pipe music. He died in 1876 at the age of seventy-eight years. He was
well known in the east-end of Glasgow, and was engaged by the
inhabitants of Bridgeton to play through their streets in the early
morning, and thus usher in the new day. This was, of course, before
Bridgeton was absorbed by the big city, and when it had some social
existence of its own. Gunn was piper to the Glasgow Gaelic Club for a
time, and kept a school for pipers. The register of this school, which
was kept with great care, would be an interesting document if it could
be got, for among his pupils were many who became well-known pipers.
Then there was also Neil Blane, the worthy town piper of Lanark, so well
described by Scott in _Old Mortality_. Neil, when introduced to the
reader, is “mounted on his white Galloway, armed with his dirk and
broadsword, and bearing a chanter, streaming with as many ribbons as
would deck out six country belles for a fair or preaching.” He could not
very well have ribbons streaming from his “chanter,” but let that pass.
It is one of these liberties that Scott sometimes takes in matters of
detail. Neil was town-piper of——(why is the town not named directly?),
and had all the emoluments of his office—the Piper’s Croft, a field of
an acre in extent, five merks and a new livery coat of the town’s
colours yearly, some hopes of a dollar upon the day of the election of
magistrates, and the privilege of paying at all the respectable houses
in the neighbourhood a visit at spring-time to rejoice their hearts with
his music, and to beg from each a modicum of seed corn. Besides, he kept
the principal change-house in the burgh, was a good-humoured, shrewd,
selfish sort of fellow, indifferent alike to the disputes about Church
and State, and anxious only to secure the goodwill of customers. His
advice to “Jenny” as to how the change-house should be conducted makes
amusing reading, and illustrates the character very forcibly.

Neil, however, must have been a creature of the novelist’s imagination,
for there is no trace of him in the burgh records or in local
traditions.

“The Piper of Northumberland” was hardly a Scotsman, but he was so
closely associated with the Borderland that a reference to his exploits
may not be out of place. His name was James Allan, and there is an old
booklet which tells at considerable length of “his parentage, education,
extraordinary adventures, and exploits, his numerous enlistings, and
wonderful escapes: with a brief narrative of his last confinement and
death in Durham Jail, which happened in 1810.” Jemmy Allan, “the
celebrated Northumberland Piper,” was a true-born gipsy, born of gipsy
parents in the west of Northumberland in 1734. His father was a piper,
and he also developed an inclination for the pipes. Besides, he was a
first-class athlete, as hardy as the ordinary gipsy, handsome, daring,
cunning, resourceful, untruthful, dishonest, and everything that could
be called derogatory to the moral character of a man. He attained to
great fame as a piper, being installed among the privileged class of
minstrels, and allowed to join the “Faa” gang, over which “Will Faa”
held sovereignty for many years. At length his fame reached the Duchess
of Northumberland, into whose good graces, by a rather mean subterfuge,
Jemmy ingratiated himself, and afterwards ranked as one of her
musicians. But his habits of dissipation were too much for polite
society, and he was dismissed. During his after wanderings he married
several times, had “amours” many, enlisted and deserted immediately
afterwards times without number, always taking care to secure the bounty
money, swindled at cards and billiards wherever he went, charmed village
society with his music until the people were off their guard, and
finished up by cheating one and all, “borrowed” horses for getting
across the country conveniently, had as many marvellous escapes as could
be crammed into the lifetime of one man, tried most of the English
towns, and made them too hot to live in, took a turn of the Scottish
Border towns, with the same result, and finally got imprisoned for life
for horse-stealing. He died in the House of Correction in Durham in
1810, just before the arrival of a pardon, which had been obtained by
the exercise of some strong influence. The following verses, which,
somehow, have the ring of _Habbie Simson’s Epitaph_, conclude the book:—

               “All ye whom Music’s charms inspire
               Who skilful minstrels do admire,
               All ye whom bagpipe lilts can fire
                     ‘Tween Wear and Tweed,
               Come, strike with me, the mournful lyre,
                     For ALLAN’S dead.

               “No more where Coquet’s stream doth glide
               Shall we view JEMMY in his pride,
               With bagpipe buckled to his side,
                     And nymphs and swains
               In groups collect, at even-tide,
                     To hear his strains.

               “When elbow moved, and bellows blew,
               On green or floor the dancers flew,
               In many turns ran through and through
                     With cap’ring canter,
               And aye their nimble feet beat true
                     To his sweet chanter.”

Among Border pipers, it may be added, the perfection of the art was
supposed to consist of being able to sing, dance, and play—the Lowland
pipe, of course—at the same time, and when the race became extinct there
was lost with them many ancient melodies.

Of the burgh pipers of Scotland there is not one left. The nearest
approach to a burgh piper is perhaps the town’s officer of Leith, who on
the occasion of the opening of a new bandstand in 1899 was presented
with a set of pipes.

[Illustration]




                             CHAPTER XIII.
                     FROM THE SEAT OF THE SCORNER.

              “Then bagpipes of the loudest drones,
              With snuffling broken-winded tones,
              Whose blasts of air, in pocket shut
              Sound filthier than from the gut.
              And make a viler noise than swine,
              In windy weather when they whine.”
                                              —_Hudibras._

  Poking fun at the pipes—English caricature—Mixed metaphor—Churchism
    and pipes—Fifteenth century satire—A biographical sneer—Thackeray—
    Bitter English writers—Testimony of a Jew—Home sarcasm—The bards—
    Joanna Baillie—A Frenchman’s opinion—William Black—Ignorance
    breaking its shins—Imported sportsmen—The duty of Highlanders.


There is a curious tendency, except in truly Highland circles, to poke
fun at the pipes. This tendency is very noticeable in the domain of
English comic journalism, the more or less comic papers hailing from the
metropolis finding in Scottish people and Scottish customs an
inexhaustible field of humour. They never tire of joking about the
strictness of our religious beliefs, our supposed slowness at perceiving
a joke, our relations with visitors from the south, our alleged
parsimony, our national dress, and our national music; and they never
fail to depict us as on every occasion wearing the kilt, carrying the
pipes, and hiding away a bottle of whisky. Sydney Smith once declared
that one might as well try to get music out of an iron foundry as out of
the pipes, and Leigh Hunt’s idea of martyrdom was to be tied to a post
within a hundred yards of a stout-lunged piper. Some cynics have said
that the walls of Jericho fell at the blast of the bagpipe, and it has
even been contended that the important part played by the instrument in
many glorious victories achieved by our armies was simply due to the
fact that the enemy had only two courses open—either to flee or to
remain and lose all desire for existence. However, as all these things
amuse our southern neighbours and do not injure us, we do not complain.

[Illustration:

  “THE SPIRIT OF THE PIPES”[12]
]

Footnote 12:

  Above the door of Dunderave, a ruined castle near Inveraray, there
  used to be a figure playing upon its nose. This suggested to J. F.
  Campbell, of Islay, the above design of “The Spirit of the Pipes.”

Our national music has always lent itself to the caricature of the
alleged humourist south of the Border. Thus a writer of perhaps two
centuries ago:—

  “North-west of a line from Greenock by Perth to Inverness is the land
  of the Gael—of the semi-barbarous instrument the bagpipe, of wild
  pibroch tunes, or rude melodies, very little known and still less
  admired, and of a species of song which has rarely been considered
  worth the trouble of translation.”

English writers who attend northern gatherings feel themselves in duty
bound to be partly amused and partly terrified at the din of the pipes,
and they often express the greatest wonder that our civilised ears can
find pleasure in it. In the same way they used to look on our religion
with contempt, and ridicule it on every opportunity. “Suffer Presbytery
and bagpipes to flourish beyond Berwick” exclaims one in his wrath. The
two seemed to be equally despicable. Butler, in putting this contempt
into rhyme, works himself into a fine frenzy of mixed metaphor;—

               “Whate’er men speak by this new light,
               Still they are sure to be i’ the right;
               ’Tis a dark lanthorn of the spirit,
               Which none can see but those who hear it.

                      ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

               This light inspires and shines upon
               The house of saint like bagpipe drone.”

How men can speak by light, how this light can be a lanthorn, how men
can hear light, or how a bagpipe drone can shine upon a house, he does
not stop to explain, but proceeds:—

               “See Phœbus or some friendly muse
               Unto small poets songs infuse,
               Which they at second hand rehearse,
               Through reed or bagpipe, verse for verse.”

Needham, another Englishman, writing in 1648, after calling a typical
Presbyterian such names as “a sainted Salamander that lives in the
flames of zeal,” “an apocryphal piece of university mummery,” “a holy
picklock,” “a gunpowder politician,” “a divine squib-crack,” “a pious
pulpit-cuffer,” and “a deadly spit-fire,” winds up with—

                “The Scotch bagpipes, the pulpit drums,
                  And priests sound high and big,
                Once more a Cause and Covenant comes
                  To show ’s a Scottish jig.”

And yet another seems to think the Separatists, a Scottish religious
sect of the 17th century, would have been better at the bagpipe than at
singing. They had, he thought, “need of somewhat as a bagpipe, or
something never used by Antichrist, to tune them; singing in their own
conventicles like hogs against raine.”

A satirical writer of 1659, when he wished to be specially cynical,
proposed that two illustrious persons should be married, and that “the
banquetting house should be prepared forthwith, with a pair of bagpipes
and a North Country jig to entertain the nobles that shall attend the
nuptials.” There was apparently nothing to be said after that.

In a political satire of the same year, Sir Archibald Johnstone, a
prominent person of that time, is thus addressed:—“Pure Sir Archibald
Johnstone, wea is me for thee, for thou hadst thought to be a muckle
laddy, but now the peeper of Kilbarchan will laugh thee to scorne.” He
could get no lower than to be laughed at by the piper.

A sneering biographer of Archbishop Sharpe, speaking of the prelate’s
grandfather’s pipes, says:—“If the pipe and bags be yet in the prelate’s
possession, it is like he may have use for them, to gift them to some
landwart church, to save the expense of a pair of organs, which may be
well enough for our rude people, who can sing to the one as well as to
the other; and if instrumental music be _juris divini_, as the prelates
assert, it cannot be thought that any people should be so phanatick as
to admit the organs in divine service and refuse the pipes.”

The Earl of Northampton, a contemporary of Shakespeare, concludes a
treatise against alleged prophecy with the remark that “oracles are most
like baggepypes and showmen, that sound no longer than they are puffed
up with winde and played upon with cunning.”

Thackeray, in _The Irish Sketch Book_, says, “Anything more lugubrious
than the drone of the pipe, or the jig danced to it, or the countenances
of the dancers and musicians, I never saw. Round each set of dancers the
people formed a ring, in which the figurantes and coryphees went through
their operations.”

Thomas Kirke, the Englishman who wrote _A Modern Account of Scotland_,
in 1679, said—“Musick they (the Highlanders) have, but not the harmony
of the sphears, but loud terrene noises, like the bellowing of beasts;
the loud bagpipe is their delight; stringed instruments are too soft to
penetrate the organs of their ears, that are only pleased with sounds of
substance.”

Dr. Mac Culloch, already quoted,[13] who travelled Scotland in 1824,
calls the bagpipe as vile a contrivance as can be imagined, and
describes in graphic language all its alleged defects, and the sad
result of listening to its music:—

Footnote 13:

  See Page 80.

  “It is harsh, imperfect, and untunable. It is not wonderful if the
  responsive vibrations of the piper’s tympanum are not very accurate,
  nor the musical organ of his brain peculiarly sensitive to sweet
  sounds after the daily induration which they must have undergone from
  such outrageous and unceasing inroads on their sensibility. The
  auricular wave is probably hardened as effectually as if it had been
  immersed in a tan pit. So much the better for them, but it is not easy
  to describe the subsidence of feeling the general deliquium, as
  physicians have it, which such worthless auditors as we are experience
  when an act of this music closes. It cannot be much unlike what the
  Mickmak or Dog-ribbed Indian feels, when his teeth have all been
  drawn.... As a vocal accompaniment this instrument is plainly
  inappropriate, unless it were to accompany a concert of tigers and
  cats. Nevertheless it is used for reels, and with bad enough success,
  if the ears are to be consulted. As a moving force, however, it
  answers its purpose very effectively. There are very few dancing airs
  that lie within its compass.... Six inches of Neil Gow’s horse hair
  would have beaten all the bagpipes that ever were blown.... The
  variations were considerably more abominable than the ground,
  musically speaking, but they are the best tests of the artist’s merit,
  as all that merit lies in difficult and rapid execution. Any man can
  blow the charge, but when it comes to action it is he who has the
  strongest fingers and the worst taste who will carry the day. Yet
  there are rules for all this cutting of notes as it is called. The
  term is not ill-chosen, as the ground is literally cut into tatters by
  a re-iteration of the most clumsy, commonplace and tasteless
  flourishes, offensive in themselves, but still more so by their
  excess, since every note is so encumbered that whatever air might have
  existed is totally swallowed up in the general confusion.”

Mac Culloch, however, admits in another place, the merits of the bagpipe
as an outdoor instrument, and an instrument of war especially.

Carr, another Englishman, who wrote in 1809, had not a good word to say
of the pipes:—

  “Whilst refinement is rapidly spreading over Scotland, it is to be
  lamented that anyone should prevent the barbarous music of the country
  from yielding to instruments more agreeable to the ear. The bagpipe is
  among the few remaining barbarisms in Scotland.... It is a sorry
  instrument, capable of little more than making an intolerable noise.
  Every person of taste and feeling must regret the decline of the harp
  and be shocked at its having been succeeded by the bagpipe.... I shall
  never forget a playing competition in Edinburgh at which I was
  present. As soon as the prize judges were seated the folding doors
  opened. A Highland piper entered in full tartan array, and began to
  press from the bag of his pipes, which were decorated with long pieces
  of riband, sounds so loud and horrible that to my imagination they
  were comparable only to those of the eternally tormented. In this
  manner he strutted up and down with the most stately march, and
  occasionally enraptured his audience, who expressed the influence of
  his instrument by loud and continued plaudits. For my part, so
  wretched is the instrument to my ears that I could not discover any
  difference in regard to expression between ‘The Gathering of the Mac
  Donalds’ and ‘Abercrombie’s Lament,’ each sound being to me equally
  depressive, discordant, and horrible.... I believe that it might have
  been three hours that common politeness compelled me to endure the
  distraction of this trial of skill, and I left the room with nearly
  the same sensations with which I should have quitted a belfry on a
  royal birthday.... One of these barbarous musicians, attempting in a
  fit of enthusiasm to pipe over eighteen miles of ground, blew the
  breath out of his body. It would have been well if he had been the
  last of his race.”

In conclusion he addresses “Lines to the Caledonian Harp,” and in
passing gives a final kick to the bagpipe—

                 “No Highland echo knows thee now;
                 A savage has usurped thy place,
                 Once filled by thee with every grace—
                 Th’ inflated pipe, with swinish drone,
                 Calls forth applauses once thine own.”

We have also the testimony of a Jew, who was compelled, by the heavy
hand of misfortune, to wander in the Highlands, and in 1828 formed his
impressions into a book which he called _The Jew Exile_. He praises the
people for their hospitality, but alas! for their music. When leaving
the village of Strathglass he says he was, in compliment, preceded by a
young piper in real Highland style:—

  “My young Highlander played me on the road five miles, and I would
  gladly have sunk the portable screech-owl appendage. A man had better
  have a poll-parrot chained to his ear or be doomed to listen to a
  concert of files and saw teeth in a saw manufactory, than be obliged
  to listen to such music. If, ‘Sir Harry,’ has any musical instrument,
  it will be the great Highland bagpipe. What a hideous yell it
  makes! ... that grunting, howling, yelling, screaming, screaking pig
  of a bag or portable screech-owl. It seems to hook its tedrum
  threthrum crotchets and quavers upon your nerves, and tears them to
  tatters, like the ‘devil machine’ in a cotton manufactory. I would
  speak with the same deference of the music of a country, as I would of
  its superstitions; but what can a man do when his very soul is twisted
  out of its socket.... To think that this squealing pig in a poke
  should be the great lever of a people’s passions. It would not let a
  man die quietly, but would almost wake the dead.”

Even in the Highlands there seems to have been a tendency to joke at the
expense of the pipes. A well-known proverb is said to have originated in
this wise. The fox being hungry, found a bagpipe, and proceeded to eat
the bag. There was still a remnant of breath in it, and when the fox bit
it the drone gave a squeal. The fox was surprised, but not frightened,
for he only said—“There’s meat and music here,” and went on with his
meal. His remark has gone down to posterity as a proverb.

The bards, whom the pipes supplanted when they supplanted the harp, did
not welcome the instrument, and satirised it in many of their poems.
Duncan Ban Mac Intyre, the bard of Glenorchy, in the poem _Aoir Uisdein
Phiobair_, abused it with sledge-hammer power; but his abuse was coarse,
and contained little genuine humour. John Mac Codrum, the Hebridean
bard, did better in _Di-Moladh Piob Dhomh’uill Bhain_, one of the most
laughable things he wrote. The history of Donald Bain’s bagpipe he
traced in an imaginative way through all its vicissitudes, from the days
of Tubal Cain, through the disaster of the Deluge, and its damaging
treatment by incompetent pipers. He compared the strains to some of the
most discordant sounds in nature, spoke of it as a trump whose horrid
music might rouse every Judas that ever lived, and used a multiplicity
of illustrations to show its want of melody.

This spirit of cynicism was not confined altogether to the Gaelic bards.
In _The Family Legend_, written by the distinguished poetess Joanna
Baillie, there is introduced a short argument between the Duke of
Argyll’s piper and “Dugald,” another of the characters. The piper has
been playing in a small ante-room leading to the Duke’s apartment, when
Dugald enters:—

     _Dugald._—Now pray thee, piper, cease! That stunning din,
                Might do good service by the ears to set
                Two angry clans; but for a morning’s rouse,
                Here at an old man’s door, it does, good sooth,
                Exceed all reasonable use. The Earl
                Has passed a sleepless night; I pray thee now
                Give o’er and spare thy pains.

      _Piper._—And spare my pains, says’t thou—I’ll do mine office
               As long as breath within my body is.

     _Dugald._—Then mercy on us all! If wind thou mean’st,
                There is within that sturdy trunk of thine,
                Old as it is, a still exhaustless store.
                A Lapland witch’s bag could scarcely match it.
                Thou could’st, I doubt not, belly out the sails
                Of a three-masted vessel with thy mouth;
                But be thy mercy equal to thy might,
                I pray thee now give o’er, in faith the Earl
                Has passed a sleepless night.

      _Piper._—Think’st thou I’m a Lowland day-hired minstrel,
               To stop or play at bidding. Is Argyll
               The lord and chieftain of our ancient clan,
               More certainly than I to him as such,
               The high hereditary piper am?
               A sleepless night, forsooth! He’s slept full oft
               On the hard heath, with fifty harnessed steeds
               Champing their fodder round him—soundly too.
               I’ll do mine office, loun, chafe as thou wilt.

And so on for a few more stanzas, till Argyll himself appears and puts
an end to the discussion. But, after all, it is mostly non-Scotsmen who
sneer at the pipes. They often understand as little of Scottish
sentiment or Scottish music as did the Frenchman, who, after hearing
“Tam o’ Shanter” recited, said it was “a story of how the devil came out
of an old church and stole the tail from the horse of a farmer called
Tam because he had played the pipes in the churchyard. I have heard,” he
added, “play your pipes Scottish, and I would like well that some person
would steal away all the pipes in Scotland.” Even our own William Black,
the most inoffensive and delightful of latter-day writers, cannot resist
the temptation to joke at the expense of the bagpipes. “Sermons,” he
says, “are like Scottish bagpipes. They sound very well when one doesn’t
hear them.” William Black, however, rarely if ever sneers, and this is
very mild indeed, compared with what some other writers have thrown at
the instrument.

The subject of Scottish national music is one against which ignorance is
always breaking its shins. In a recent English novel, for instance, a
Highlander is represented as sitting by the roadside singing a Jacobite
song and accompanying himself on the bagpipe, while one of the most
reputable of London afternoon papers gravely remarked when referring to
the letting of Inveraray Castle, after the death of the eighth Duke of
Argyll—“Ichabod is the watchword for the Highlands and Islands, and the
pibroch may skirl the lament with better cause than if half the clan had
fallen before the claymores of an alien tartan.” These are extreme
cases, no doubt, but they are only two out of many. It is, of course,
vain to expect Scottish feelings from non-Scottish people, and the over-
running of our land by imported sportsmen does not improve matters a
bit—

              “Cockneys, Frenchmen, swells, and tourists,
                Motley-garbed and garish crew;
              Belted pouches, knickerbockers,
                Silken hose and patent shoe.”

Although these people may cease their scoffing and make themselves as
Highland as anyone can be whom nature has not made Highland, their
affection for the music and their professions of goodwill are not likely
to help to preserve it. It is for real Highlanders to keep alive their
own music and show scorners that it is not going to die the death, but
live while there are Highlands and a Highland people. If, on the other
hand, they are playing the lament for a perishing race and a dying
language, it is not much wonder if neighbours chime in with an emphatic
Amen. Better far is the spirit of Alexander Fisher, a Glasgow poet, who
wrote for _Whistlebinkie_:—

 “You’ll may spoke o’ ta fittle, you’ll may prag o’ ta flute,
 An’ ta clafer o’ pynas, pass trums, clairnet an’ lute.
 Put ta far pestest music you’ll may heard, or will fan,
 Is ta kreat Hielan’ pagpipe, ta kran Hielan’ pagpipe, ta prite o’ ta
    lan’.


 O! tere is no one can knew all her feelin’, her thought,
 Whan ta soon o’ ta pibroch will langsyne to her prought,
 An’ her mint whirl rount apout wi’ ta pleasure once fan,
 When she hears ta kreat pagpipes, ta kran, etc.

        ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

 Whan ta clans all pe kather’t, an’ all rety for fought,
 To ta soon o’ ta fittle, woult tey march tid ye’ll thought?
 No not a foot woult tey went, not a claymore pe drawn,
 Till tey heard ta kreat pagpipe, to kran, etc.

 Whan ta funeral is passin’ slow, slow, through ta klen,
 Ta hearts all soft wi’ ouskie what prings tears from ta men!
 ’Tis ta Coronach’s loot wail soonin’ solemn an’ kran,
 From to kreat Hielan’ pagpipe, ta kran Hielan’, etc.

 Whan ta wattin tauks place, O! what shoy, frolic an’ fun,
 An’ ta peoples all meetit, an’ ta proose has been run,
 Tere’s no music for dancin’, has yet ever been fan,
 Like ta kreat Hielan’ pagpipe, ta kran Hielan’, etc.

 O, tat she hat worts to tolt all here lofe an’ telight
 She has in ta pagpipes, twoult teuk long, long years to write,
 Put she’ll shust teuk a trap pefore her task sh’ll pegan,
 So here’s ta pagpipe, ta kran Hielan’ pagpipe, ta prite o’ ta lan’.”

[Illustration:

  “WHILE BREATHING CHANTERS PROUDLY SWELL.”—_Scott._

  _Mr. McSkirliguy_ (_beguiling the time with some cheerful pibrochs on
    his national instrument_).

  _Mr. Southdown_ (_travelling north with his Family by the Night
    Mail_). “Dear, dear, dear! What a Shame they don’t Grease the Wheels
    of these Carriages! I can’t get a Wink of Sleep! (_Mrs. S. groans in
    sympathy._) I declare I’ll Complain to the Directors.”

  BY CHARLES KEENE, Jan. 21, 1871.

  (Reproduced from _Punch_, by special permission of the Proprietors.)
]




                              CHAPTER XIV.
                        THE HUMOUR OF THE PIPES.

             “Wha wadna be in love
               Wi’ bonnie Maggie Lauder?
             A piper met her gaun to Fife
               And spiered what was’t they ca’d her;
             Richt scornfully she answered him,
              ‘Begone, you hallan shaker:
             Jog on your gate, you bladder skate,
               My name is Maggie Lauder.’”
                                         —_Old Scots Song._

  _Punch’s_ joke—King Charles’s heads—An amusing competition—A
    Highlander’s Irishism—Wedding experiences—A piper’s fall—A
    resourceful piper—A Cameron piper and his officer—“Lochaber no
    more”—An elephant’s objection—Embarked in a tub—Glasgow street
    scene—Bad player’s strategy—What the wind did—A new kind of tripe—A
    Pasha and a piper—A Gordon nervous—A jealous piper—Dougal Mac
    Dougal’s downfall.


Apart from the wilfully sarcastic humour exemplified in the previous
chapter, there clings round the pipes a host of innocently laughable
stories. _Punch_, the recognised pioneer of comic journalism, and always
the ablest of that class of papers, has in its day had a number of jokes
about the pipes, and, to do the writers and artists justice, they have
always been enjoyable, even to the perfervid Scot, and not of the kind
which does more to show the ignorance of the inventors than create a
laugh. _Punch’s_ humour is broad, but hardly ever offensive, and the
picture by Charles Keene, reproduced on another page, may be taken as a
fair sample. The drawing, which appeared on January 21st, 1871, shows
the best art of the caricaturist wedded to the broadest and yet the most
enjoyable humour. Charles Keene, by the way, was himself a performer on
the pipes, which he studied thoroughly. On one occasion he was some
distance from home seeing a sick friend, and, writing afterwards to
London, he said: “My only solace was skirling away for an hour on the
lonely beach, and I generally chose the most melancholy pibroch I could
think of.” So he can hardly be accused of endeavouring to joke at the
expense of the instrument.

After _Punch_ I must be permitted to work off several stories which have
been King Charles’s Heads unto me since I began to compile this volume.
They persisted in cropping up, now in some book which I was consulting,
then in a newspaper, and next in conversation with acquaintances. I know
all their variations so well now that I recognise them a long way off,
and generally manage to avoid them. Four are particularly determined in
keeping themselves to the front:—

A wandered Celt found himself laid up in an hospital in America with a
disease which fairly puzzled the physicians. They did not know what to
do with their patient, for he seemed to be sinking into the grave for no
reason whatever. They held a consultation, and decided as a last
resource to try music, preferably bagpipe music, as the patient was a
Scotsman. So every night for a fortnight a piper played in the lobbies
of the hospital, and gradually the Celt began to revive. At the
fortnight’s end he was well enough to be discharged, but—and this was
the worst feature of the case—_all the other patients had died_.

Once, I remember, that story hailed from the Crimea and referred to a
dying soldier of Sir Colin Campbell’s, who was cured by the pipes in one
hour. The music was, however, the death of forty-one of his comrades.
The exact number killed varies from time to time, but that is a small
matter. The incident is always the same. The last occasion on which it
crossed my path was in the spring of 1900, when it appeared in the
“London Letter” of a Glasgow evening paper, to which it had been
telegraphed the same morning from the “City Notes” of one of the leading
London dailies, each of the journalists concerned treating it as a great
discovery in the field of humour. And I had been doing all I could to
keep out of its way for about a year previously.

The next also shows the wonderful powers of pipe music. Music,
apparently, hath charms to soothe the savage _beast_. A Scotsman, a
piper of course, lost his way on an American prairie, and was overtaken
by a bear. To appease the brute Sandy threw it his modest lunch, the
only food he had to keep him alive until he found shelter. But Bruin was
not satisfied, and threatened to dine off Sandy himself, whereupon the
piper thought he would play a farewell lament before quitting the world.
So he struck up “Lochaber no more.” No sooner, however, did the big
drone give its first squeal than the bear stood stock still, then turned
and fled precipitously. Then Sandy exclaimed—

“If she had known she was so fond of ta music, she could have had ta
pipes before ta supper.”

On its last round that story had reached Siberia, and the Celt, who was
hungry, was pursued by a pack of wolves, who “fled with hideous howls”
when the slogan of the clan was heard.

The next illustrates the Highlander’s propensity towards whisky
drinking, and it rarely varies to any great extent. A Highland laird,
being unable to maintain a permanent piper, employed a local musician
occasionally when he had a party. Donald was once overlooked as to his
usual dram before commencing to play, and in revenge he gave very bad
music, which caused the laird to remonstrate with him and ask the cause.
“It’s the bag,” said Donald; “she pe ferry, ferry hard.” “And what will
soften it?” asked his employer. “Och, just whusky.” Accordingly the
butler was sent for a tumblerful of the specific, which Donald quickly
drank. “You rascal,” said the laird, “did you not say it was for the
bagpipes?” “Och, yess, yess,” said Donald; “but she will pe a ferry
peculiar pipes this. _She aye likes it blawed in._”

The piper’s story associated with “Boyne Water” is the fourth. The name
and the regiment vary, but the story is always the same:—

Sandy Mac-something or other—the surname has not come down to posterity—
was an old piper in the 92nd, and when his detachment was located in
Ireland an order was given that “Boyne Water” was not to be played. The
colonel probably did not wish to hurt the feelings of any of his
neighbours. “Boyne Water,” however, was Sandy’s favourite tune, and to
the surprise of the colonel, the first time the company marched out
after the prohibitory order had been issued, Sandy struck up the
forbidden air. “What do you mean?” cried the officer. “Do you not know
that you are not allowed to play ‘Boyne Water?’” “It’ll no pe ‘Boyne
Water’ at all,” replied Sandy. “It’ll pe quite another tune, but to the
same air.” But Sandy had to stop playing it all the same.

An amusing description is given by a writer who travelled in the
Highlands about seventy years ago, of a competition which he witnessed
between two pipers in Tongue. There was a certain John Mac Donald who
had blown before the Emperor of China, having accompanied an embassy to
that country, and a Donald Abroch, who traced his descent from some of
the hereditary pipers. Both had gained prizes in public, and they were
natural rivals:—

  “The drone of Donald’s pipes streamed with bonny flags of red and
  blue, while he made his cheeks as red as crimson, and bobbed around as
  he blew. Meantime the banner of defiance hoisted on his antagonist’s
  spirit-stirring engine floated on the troubled air in the radiant
  yellow of the Celestial Empire. As etiquette demanded that each should
  be heard in turn, the Imperial piper, having the preference, as of
  divine right, put forth all his energy on the advent of his rival, as
  the cock crows a louder defiance should some neighbour chanticleer
  intrude on his hereditary domain. But John was now seventy, nor had
  his wind much improved by the quantity of monsoon which he had
  swallowed in the Indian seas. His breeze being blown, Donald, who knew
  the weak point in his rival’s lungs, now raised a blast so loud and
  dread that it reminded one of the roaring of the lion of Rabbi
  Johosuah Ben Hananiah, at the sound of whose voice all the people’s
  teeth dropped out of their heads. John turned yellow with despair, as
  the Imperial ribbons, and thus ended the first act.

  “It was not for us to decide between rival pibrochs or rival pipers,
  but by the aid of some judicious applause and more acceptable whisky a
  sort of amicable armistice was produced till the next act should
  begin. It was now necessary that they should play together a duet,
  composed of different pibrochs in different keys, in which it was the
  business of each to outscream his neighbour by the united force of
  lungs and elbows. The north side of the room was in possession of the
  Emperor’s piper, and he of our clan drew up his force on the south;
  each strutting and bellowing till, like rival bullfinches, they were
  ready to burst their lungs and bag, each playing his own tune in
  harmonious dissonance; and both as they crossed each other at every
  turn, looking the defiance they would have breathed had their wind not
  been otherwise employed. The chanters screamed, the drones grunted,
  and as the battle raged with increasing fury, Donald’s wind seemed
  ready to burst its cerements, while the steam of the whisky distilling
  through the bag dropped as from the nozzle of a worm-pipe. Poor John
  was now nearly blown, but as we were unwilling that he should puff out
  for our amusement the last of that breath which he had with so much
  difficulty brought all the way from Pekin, we determined that enough
  had been done for honour, and put an end to the concert according to
  the rules of bucolic contest, by allowing equal praise and equal
  prizes to each swain. That they had both played _fort bein_ could not
  be doubted, still less according to the French pun that they had
  played _bein fort_.”

Pipers, when playing in public, often get into awkward positions. During
the performance of the well-known Julien Army Quadrilles, in connection
with which local bands represent England, Scotland, and Ireland—the
chief performing band being the orchestra—the pipes were once put into a
cellar in the lower part of the building and the door closed. Here, on a
given signal, they struck up “The Campbells are coming.” Thereupon the
doors gradually opened, and the pipers marched up from the lower regions
and through the vast hall, which was crowded. On their approach the
cheering was so vociferous that it was impossible to hear the sound of
the pipes, and it was only by carefully watching the parts of the tune,
the step, and the swing of the leading piper (who was endeavouring to
reach the platform on which the orchestra was seated) that they were
able to play in unison. Having ascended the platform, they placed
themselves in a conspicuous position, and when they stopped playing, the
well-known imitation fierce battle, for which these quadrilles are
famous, began. While rehearsing this performance, it should be added,
the door of the lower apartments had been accidentally left open, so
that the sounds were distinctly and loudly heard by the bandmaster, who
was a German. With lightning rapidity he came tearing downstairs in a
furious rage, exclaiming in wild tones—“Mein Got, fat is this. You may
be as well up on de stage. Why is de door not closed according to my
instructions?” Being thus interrogated, the pipe-major appealed to piper
Dougal Mac Donald, who was the last to enter, and who should have closed
the door.

“Why did you not shut the door when you came in, Dougal?” he asked.

Dougal’s reply, which was characteristic of the man, was—

“Ach man! What did I know? The door wasn’t shut when I opened it.”

After this matters went on all right and to the satisfaction of the
bandmaster.

On another occasion, when taking part in these quadrilles, the same band
had to cross a plank arrangement erected above the heads of the audience
before they could get to the platform. To get there under such
circumstances required tact, in addition to a good nerve.

To relate another awkward experience:—A piper was on one occasion
ordered to play at a wedding near Glasgow, at which his colonel was one
of the guests. The object was to take the company by surprise. The piper
therefore went there secretly. He had three and a half miles to walk, as
the ‘bus which plied to and fro at that time (twenty years ago) was full
of ladies. The day being exceptionally wet, he got drenched. The first
incident took place shortly after leaving the barracks in the
Gallowgate, where a fairly well dressed but drunken woman
unceremoniously slipped her arm inside his and said—“I am going where
you are going.” She vowed she knew him and all the pipers, as well as
all the officers, and the colonel in particular—in fact, she knew the
whole regiment. While making these declarations she clung tenaciously to
the piper, and nothing would shake her off. A motley crowd gathered
round them, and, to make matters worse, no policeman was in sight. A
gentleman, however, opportunely came to the rescue, and extricated the
piper from his predicament by inviting him into a shop and letting him
out by a side door into another street. In due course the piper arrived
at the mansion house where he was to play. He first made for the
kitchen, in order to be out of the way and to have his clothes and
appointments dried and replenished. Here he was accosted by a head
official, a woman, who wished to know what he was doing there and what
he wanted. The piper replied that he was sent there.

“Who sent you, and what for?” she asked.

He replied—“Colonel ——.”

“And who is he?” she next asked.

“He is my colonel.”

“Well,” she replied, snappishly, “I don’t know him, and never heard
anything about you.”

The piper, however, entered the kitchen, and made for the fire. It so
happened that the head cook—a stout, portly, good-natured woman—was a
native of Tobermory. She took the drenched man in hand, and when she
discovered that he could speak Gaelic, they became the best of friends.
He got himself so much into her favour that she undertook to dry his
coat and polish all his accoutrements. In course of time he got
brightened up and ready for any call. He had to ignore all the time the
repelling looks and nasty hints of the head official referred to, who
would have nothing to do with him, and whose dignity was evidently hurt
at his presence there without her being consulted. At two in the morning
he was sent for by the mistress of the house—a fine specimen of the old
Scottish lady—who led him to a door which communicated with the ball-
room, and, without more ado, she gave him the following instructions:—

“You’ll just blow up your bags and you will play in there”—pointing to
the door—“and John will show you where to go to.”

The piper struck up the “Cock of the North” very suddenly, to the
surprise of everyone. When he entered the room he nearly fell, the floor
was so smooth. Next, his big drone touched the chandeliers, under which
were standing three or four ladies with the usual long trains to their
dresses. He naturally became somewhat embarrassed, for he had to watch
his tune, to watch his feet, to watch the chandelier, as well as to
avoid the ladies’ dresses, and at the same time to watch “John,” who
ultimately led him into the recesses of a window, where he played the
“Highland Scottische” and “Reel of Tulloch.” This done, it was part of
his programme to play “The Campbells are coming,” and make his exit by
the door through which he entered. There were, unfortunately for him,
too many doors, and, as “John” had left, he was again perplexed. He,
however, made for, as he thought, the proper door, under the same
difficulties as he experienced on his entrance; but, instead of getting
out, he was landed in a pantry where there were two young women busily
engaged cutting up sandwiches. Here he was kept prisoner for about half
an hour. Any pipers who have had the same experience will admit that it
requires no little confidence and caution to discharge satisfactorily
such duties under similar circumstances.

There is a story told of another piper, which does not terminate quite
so happily. Piper Hugh Mac L—— was engaged to play at an Irish wedding.
Now, Irish people are generally very kind, and on such occasions are
possessed of a good supply of “the mercies.” The room in which the
wedding was held was rather small for dancing purposes, considering the
number of guests. They therefore placed a table in the corner of the
room, on the top of it a chair, and on the top of that a small flat
stool, on which sat the piper. Here he blew with might and main till
three o’clock in the morning, when down fell piper, pipes, and all on
the floor. There were, luckily, no bones broken. Legs were broken, but
they were wooden ones. After this somewhat amusing catastrophe the music
ceased for the night.

Pipers were a resourceful race, if the following story is to be
considered a typical one. A well-known piper, whose name is withheld
because some of his people are still with us, was very often hard put to
it for money, and many and various were the means he took to raise the
wind. One day, more than usually dead-broke, he found an old mahogany
leg of a table lying at the Clydeside, near Glasgow Green. He picked it
up, and going to a joiner’s shop in the Briggate, he hired a turning
lathe for an hour or two. Being an expert maker as well as player, he
soon had an imitation set of drones and a chanter turned out of the
mahogany. Then he got a piece of old skin and made a bag which would not
have kept in small stones, not to speak of wind, and by means of
borrowing pence from acquaintances, he raised some green velvet and
ribbons. After he had carefully covered and adorned his “pipes,” he
bored holes about an inch down the “drones,” stained the “virls” black,
and gravely offered the lot to a pawnbroker. He, poor man, did not know
much about pipes, for he gave the piper £1 on them. Then the dead-broke
man repaid all his loans and went off a richer man by some seventeen or
eighteen shillings. What the pawnbroker said when he attempted to sell
the “pipes” has not come down to posterity.

The best of the bagpipe stories, however, come from the regimental
piper. Army pipers were, and perhaps still are, treated a little more
leniently than their fellows. A piper of the 79th Cameron Highlanders
was brought before the officer in command for being drunk. The officer
was a bit of a wag, and on the delinquent being marched in he, looking
very severe, said, “Are you the piper that played before Moses?” “Yes,
sir,” said the piper, taking advantage of the familiarity. The officer
was a bit nonplussed, and shouted, “Get out of here, you scoundrel, and
never come before me again.” A day or so after the piper was again
brought up for being drunk, and the officer, annoyed at seeing him back
so soon, said, “I don’t wish to punish you, but if you continue coming
before me I must treat you like any other delinquent.” Quoting from the
defaulters’ sheet, he continued, “Drunk, drunk, drunk; why, sir, you’re
always drunk. Look here, just put yourself in my position and see what
you would do.” On the officer vacating the chair the piper, nothing
daunted, took his place, and proceeding to scan his own defaulter sheet,
said in grave tones, “Drunk, drunk, drunk. Why sir, you’re always drunk;
I’ll give you seven days’ cells and twenty-eight days confined to
barracks.” The officer was too amazed at the piper’s impudence to do
more than shout at the top of his voice—“Sergeant-major, take this man
out of here,” and as we have no record of any future infliction of
punishment, we may infer that the piper’s game of bluff succeeded in
getting him off scathless.

Another story of a piper who “took more than was good for him” is
associated with “Lochaber no more.” It was the duty of a piper of the
93rd Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders to play the officers’ mess.
Feeling somewhat unsteady, he chose “Lochaber no more” as being an easy
tune and suited for hiding his condition. His eccentric performance,
however, did not escape the colonel, who was in quarters close by
dressing for dinner, and, in passing to the mess room he called out
“Piper Mac Donald.” “Yes, sir,” replied the piper, approaching the
colonel with his best salute and under the impression that he was to be
complimented for serenading the commanding officer by his rendering of
such a beautiful air. “What tune was that you played?” growled the
colonel. “Hic! ‘Lochubu no more,’ sir.” “Then,” said the colonel
severely, “you’ll be piper no more, sir,” and Piper Mac Donald forthwith
returned to the ranks.

It is a well-known fact that pipers in Highland regiments are posted to
companies, and follow them wherever they go. On one occasion a company
of the Gordons were marching from a place called Jullunder to Fort
Kangra, situated on one of the lower ranges of the Himalayas.
Accompanying them was an elephant, on which were placed sick and
exhausted men. After a few days’ march they were deprived of music on
account of the piper’s feet becoming blistered, and he was relegated to
the back of the elephant. On the last day’s march, before entering their
new station, some one suggested that in order to brighten them up the
piper might be requested to play on the elephant’s back at the head of
the company. To this the officer assented, and accordingly the piper was
handed his pipes. When he began to tune them up it was evident that the
elephant had no appreciation of such sounds, for he shook his head,
flapped his big ears menacingly, raised his trunk, with which he
embraced the piper round the waist, and violently threw him and his
pipes into a ditch as a mark of his disapproval of such music.

A camp of exercise some three miles out of Delhi was visited at night by
a terrible storm of rain and wind. Tents were blown over, and much
wreckage and damage done. The pipe-major and drum-major, who, of course,
were both staff-sergeants, occupied a small tent by themselves, situated
in a hollow. Towards morning, just as daylight appeared, it was observed
from the sergeants’ mess that the pipe-major had got all his valuables—
silver, pipes, banner, dirk, sporran, etc.—placed in a tub in which he
himself was sitting. All round outside his tent, for a considerable
distance, was a sea of water, so hard had it rained during the night.
Being very anxious to save his valuables, uniform, and appointments he
embarked in the tub and paddled shorewards, and while doing so his
comrades began to shout and jeer at him. This roused the pipe-major’s
temper to boiling pitch, and caused him to become rather unsteady in his
precarious craft. Veering a little too much to one side, over it went,
and piper and cargo were thrown into the water, to the evident delight
of his comrades.

The playing of the Lords of Session from the hotel to the Court House in
Glasgow was an old custom. After having performed this duty, the captain
usually marched the band and escort to Gallowgate Barracks by way of
Saltmarket, which was at one time a very rough locality. While playing
through the street, the pipe-major of a gallant corps suddenly found
himself in a very unpleasant fix. A decrepit, drunken fish-wife pounced
upon him, lovingly caught him round the neck, and insisted on hugging
and kissing him. To make things worse the band kept marching on through
the large crowd, and no amount of struggling and swearing would make
this enthusiastic follower relinquish her hold of the pipe-major. At
last by a supreme effort he managed to extricate himself from her dirty
clutches. It is needless to say that the escort and pipers enjoyed a
fine laugh at the pipe-major’s predicament.

To show how good may sometimes come of evil, one of our gallant pipers,
who had evidently been enjoying himself rather freely the night before,
on returning to barracks found himself detailed for the duties of
orderly piper, the first of which is to play the men’s breakfast pipes.
The piper’s condition not being what it might have been, and the morning
being cold and raw, he was not making a very good tune. This attracted
the notice of the orderly officer, who belonged to the piper’s company,
and forthwith he had the piper brought before him and rebuked for his
bad playing. The piper, quick as thought, ingeniously turned matters
into quite a different channel by putting all the blame on his chanter.
He impudently pointed out to the young officer the lowest hole, which is
the largest on the chanter.

“Just look at the size of that hole, sir,” said he. “It is far too
large, sir, and while I was _birling_ with my little finger it went into
the hole, sir, and when I was getting it out it caused that nasty
screeching, sir.”

“Oh,” replied the officer, “is that the cause of it? Then you require a
new chanter.”

“Yes, very badly, sir,” replied the piper.

The officer, being a man of means, said, “Very well, I will give you a
present of one.”

This is obviously a case where the piper gulled the young officer into
presenting him with a new chanter, whereas he should have been severely
reprimanded for his unfitness to perform his duty.

A novel accident once happened to the pipers of the Cameronians while
playing in the Botanic Gardens in Glasgow. At that time they wore a Tam
o’ Shanter or blue bonnet, slightly cocked to one side. The day was
stormy, and the wind came in gusts. Eight of the pipers were marching
jauntily along in line when a gust of wind suddenly came and blew off
the eight Tam o’ Shanters, as if by word of command, starting with the
pipe-major, who was on the right. The scramble for bonnets which
followed can be more easily imagined than described.

Piper Donald Menzies, of the Breadalbane Fencibles, was one of the
resourceful kind. The men were in the habit of receiving money in place
of a certain quantity of rations, and on one occasion instead of buying
food in the usual way many of them bought whisky. This came to the
colonel’s ears, and he at once ordered the adjutant to go round at a
certain hour and report to him what the men were cooking for dinner. The
order got wind and the Fencibles were on the alert. When the adjutant
came to where Piper Menzies was doing his cooking he asked “What have
you got here, Donald?” “Tripe, sir,” said Donald. “Tripe,” said the
adjutant, “now just let me see,” and he lifted the lid off the pot.
“Well, Donald,” he said, walking away and smiling, “I never saw tripe
before with buttons and holes in it.” Donald had cut up a pair of white
moleskin trousers and put pieces of them into the pot to make believe he
was to have a dinner.

Shortly after the occupation of Cairo by the British troops, the late
Nubar Pasha took a prodigious fancy to the music of the Black Watch, and
had the idea of having a servant taught the use of the bagpipes. Nubar
despatched a French friend, who spoke English, to interview a piper on
the subject. Donald replied—“Weel, he micht learn or he micht no’. But,
let me tell you, it needs wind an’ mickle strength to fill the bag o’
the pipes an’ keep blawin’. Sae if yin o’ thae Egyptian chaps took the
job on he’d need to be bandaged a’ ow’re like yin o’ thae old mummies,
or maybe he’d burst himsel’!” This conversation was reported to Nubar,
who took the remarks seriously. So he gave up the idea of having a piper
attached to his household, as the use of the bagpipe was attended with
the prospect of such danger to the performer.

Soldiers are not nervous men as a rule, but a pipe-major of the Gordons
was. While the regiment was being inspected, he noticed while standing
behind the band that the colonel’s helmet was reversed. The officer
seemed perturbed about something, strutting backward and forward, every
now and then digging his sword into the ground. This made the pipe-
major, who was anxious to call the colonel’s attention to the mistake in
connection with his headgear, more nervous than before. At last by a
supreme effort he mustered up courage, and stepping out of the ranks he
approached the colonel, and after saluting said, “I beg your pardon,
sir, but your helmet is upside down, sir.” “What!” roared the officer,
evidently thinking the man had become insane. The pipe-major became more
nervous than ever, and stammered out, “I beg your pardon, sir, but I
mean to say, sir, that your helmet is outside in, sir.” “The devil it
is, sir,” roared the colonel, and the pipe-major as a last resource got
out, “Well, I mean to say, sir, that your hat is backside foremost,
sir.” The colonel instantly calmed down, and took the incident in good
part, put his “hat” right and thanked the pipe-major, who did not forget
his nervousness or his mistakes for many days.

Yet another instance of how the piper made free with his superiors. A
Highland officer having in obedience to orders added a drum to his pipe
band, a spirit of jealousy soon afterwards arose between the piper and
the drummer respecting their title to precedence. This gradually
increased until it became personal animosity. At length the subject of
the quarrel was submitted to the officer, who decided in favour of the
drummer, whereupon the piper exclaimed, “Ads wunds, sir (whatever that
may mean), and shall a little rascal that beats upon a sheep’s skin tak’
the right hand of me that am a musician?” A musician, no less!

The last item to be given under this heading is meant to illustrate the
high opinion Highlanders have of the pipes, but I do not vouch for its
authenticity. It is from a book of _Scottish Life and Character_:—

  “Dougal Mac Dougal, he left his native fastnesses for the great city
  of Glasgow, where he joined the police, as many a better man has done
  since. But Dougal was not content with being a policeman, he must
  needs join the police band. By-and-by another native of the fastnesses
  came to Glasgow, and meeting Dougal, he said-‘And wad it be true
  Tougal that her is a member of the polis prass pand?’

  “‘Yus, Alastair, her was.’

  “‘And what instrument was she play, Tougal?’

  “‘Ta trombone.’

  “Ta trombone! Her as draws and draws and plaws and plaws? Och, Tougal,
  wad she tempt Providence by leaving ta pipes for that?’”

After which we had better adjourn.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER XV.
                       DEMONIAC PIPES AND PIPERS.

           “A winnock bunker in the east,
           There sat Auld Nick in shape o’ beast;
           A towzie tyke, black, grim, and large,
           To gi’e them music was his charge;
           He screw’d the pipes and gart them skirl,
           Till roof and rafters a’ did dirl.”
                                                   —_Burns._

  Tam o’ Shanter—The Devil’s favourite instrument—“Sorcerers” burned—A
    bard’s satire—Glasgow Cathedral story—A Hebridean Tam o’ Shanter—
    Continental ideas—Reformation zeal—Ghostly pipers—A “changeling
    piper”—_The Lost Pibroch_—The Chisholm “enchanted pipes”—The Black
    Chanter of Clan Chattan.


It was not at all a new idea that of Burns, when he represented the
arch-enemy of mankind playing the pipes to the revellers in Alloway’s
“auld haunted kirk.” The ancients had it, and the sylvan divinity Pan,
who can be identified with the Satan of Scottish superstition, is said
to have appeared as a performer on the bagpipe. A flute with seven reeds
was his favourite instrument, and this may be identified with the
bagpipe of tradition. Popular belief in the seventeenth century labelled
the pipes as the Devil’s favourite musical instrument. In 1679 some
unhappy women were burned at Bo’ness for sorcery, and they were accused,
among other things, “of meeting Satan and other witches at the cross of
Murestane, above Kinneil, where they all danced, and the Devil acted as
piper.” Satan is also alleged to have acted in the same capacity in the
guise of a rough, tawny dog at a dance on the Pentland Hills. Mac
Mhurich, the bard of Clan Ranald, composed a Gaelic satire on national
music, in which the “coronach of women” and _piob gleadhair_, the pipe
of clamour, are called “the two ear sweethearts of the black fiend—a
noise fit to rouse the imps,” and there is a story connected with
Glasgow Cathedral which shows further the prevalence of the idea. The
gravestones round the Cathedral lie so close that one cannot walk across
the ground without treading on them. This, however, has not always been
able to prevent resurrections, as would appear from the legend.
Somewhere about the year 1700 a citizen one morning threw the whole town
into a state of inexpressible horror and consternation by giving out
that in passing at midnight through the kirkyard he saw a neighbour of
his own, lately buried, rise out of his grave and dance a jig with the
devil, who played the air of “Whistle ower the lave o’t” on the bagpipe.
The civic dignitaries and ministers were so scandalised at the
intelligence that they sent the town drummer through the streets next
morning forbidding any to whistle, sing or play the infernal tune in
question.

A story curiously like that of Tam o’ Shanter, but of a much more
pleasant nature, at least for the human participator, comes from the
Hebrides—the particular isle is not stated. A gentleman innkeeper, who
was taught by Angus Mac Kay, the late Queen’s piper, and could play the
pipes as well as the violin, was sadly addicted to the drinking habit,
and had frequent fits of _delirium tremens_, in which he had
extraordinary experiences. Once when he had been indulging with his
usual prodigality, the result found him in a large hall, laid out for
dancing, and with a band of performers dressed in blue. The chief of the
blue imps stood as if in front of the orchestra, grinning, capering, and
gesticulating in the most fantastic manner. In the course of time,
however, he became more amiable, and, drawing up his tail over his
shoulder, he fingered it as if it were the chanter of the pipes, and
there poured out a most inspiriting jig, the force of which neither
demon nor man could resist, and the performance rivalled that in
Alloway’s “auld haunted kirk.” But, and this is where Tam o’ Shanter
failed and the innkeeper succeeded, “mine host” remembered the tune
after his recovery, and played it, and the last teller of the story says
he “heard it played by another party who had learned it from him.” But,
unfortunately, he was too lazy to make a copy, so the “Lost Jig” went
the way of the “Lost Pibroch,” and is now unknown to the World.

[Illustration:

  THE DANCE OF DEATH

  _From a Woodcut of the Time of Henry VIII._
]

That the idea of a demoniac piper is not peculiar to Scotland is shown
by the sculpture executed by the celebrated German artist, Durer, which
represents the Devil playing on the pipes; by an engraving of a pageant
at Antwerp in the sixteenth century, where a similar figure occurs, and
by various Continental stories and pictures. The pipes were, it should
be added, far more often associated with religious matters than with
demoniacal. The figure on the “apprentice pillar” in Rosslyn Chapel is
that of a cherub playing on a Highland bagpipe, and, as has been shown
in a previous article, there are many indications in ecclesiastical
architecture and in ecclesiastical history that the pipes were not
altogether banned from associating with the good. After the Reformation,
it is true, they were held to be the Devil’s instruments, and between
1570 and 1624 pipers were severely persecuted; but the zeal of the
reformers, while always praiseworthy, often outran their discretion, and
in their condemnation of instrumental music they included all minstrels.
They vested supernatural powers in things which we now look upon as
ordinary. The miseries of the Civil War were foretold by the appearance
of a monster in the River Don, the disappearance of gulls from the lakes
near Aberdeen, the loud tucking of drums in Mar, and in a seaman’s house
at Peterhead, where trumpets and bagpipes and tolling of bells gave
additional horror to the sound.

The ghostly piper of Highland mythology was often seen mounted on a big
black horse, while multitudes of voices sang round him, sometimes in
light clothing and with long white staffs in their hands. In one
instance—it comes from Dairy, in Ayrshire—“the sound of voices was
terrible, and all struck in at the chorus. The tunes seemed to part and
make way for the rider to get out, but, no, they closed again.” One such
piper frequented the wild passes of Drumouchter, about the highest and
most dreary part of the hills now crossed by the Highland Railway. At
the hour of gloaming passers-by could hear the melancholy wailing of the
pipes, but they never could tell from whence it came. Prince Charles
Edward Stuart is alleged to have fought there a band of English cavalry,
when on his retreat from Derby in 1745, and though his men won, the
piper, if he was Prince Charlie’s piper, seems to have considered the
incident a matter of perpetual mourning. Other sights and spectres, as
of people engaged in mortal combat, are said to have been seen near the
place.

In a North Highland story, a “changeling” plays the pipes. A tailor went
to a farmhouse to work, and just as he was going in, somebody put into
his hands a child of a month old, which a little lady dressed in green
seemed to be waiting to receive. The tailor ran home and gave the child
to his wife. When he got back to the farmhouse, he found the farmer’s
child crying and disturbing everybody. It was a fairy changeling which
the nurse had taken in, meaning to give the farmer’s own child to the
fairy in exchange, but nobody knew this but the tailor. When they were
all gone out, he began to talk to the child. “Hae ye your pipes?” said
the tailor. “They’re below my head,” said the changeling. “Play me a
spring,” said the tailor. Out sprang the little man and played the
bagpipe round the room. Then there was a noise outside, and the elf
said, “It’s my folk wanting me,” and away he went up the chimney, and
then they fetched back the farmer’s own child from the tailor’s house.

Apart from their connection with supernatural beings or supernatural
agencies, the pipes have at various times in the history of Scotland
been credited with supernatural power. The “Lost Pibroch” itself is an
echo, but a magnificently worded echo, of the old connection between the
pipes and the supernatural. In it we have something like a modern
literary curiosity, a Highland story written in the true Highland ring
and spirit, and yet as splendid an intellectual treat to a non-Highland
reader as he can get anywhere in the King’s English. It exaggerates the
power of the pipes, but it is an exaggeration that is fully in unison
with the nature of the people, and it is the gem of all the stories of
pipers and the supernatural. “Then here’s another for fortune,” said
_Paruig Dall_, and he went through the woods with his pipes under his
oxter, to follow those whom his notes had already set awandering.

The Chisholm preserves, or at least did at one time preserve a relic
believed to be of great antiquity. It is a chanter which is supposed to
have a peculiar faculty of indicating the death of the chief by
spontaneously bursting, and after each fracture it is carefully repaired
by a silver fillet, which is an improvement on the original method of
mending with a leathern throng. The family piper, when from home at a
wedding, heard his chanter crack, and at once started up, saying he must
return, for The Chisholm was dead. And he was.

But the most famous of all such articles is “The Black Chanter of Clan
Chattan.” This is a relic of the fight between the Clan Quhele and the
Clan Yha on the North Inch of Perth in 1396. It is made of _lignum
vitæ_, and, according to tradition is endued, with magical powers. About
the end of the battle, so the tradition goes, an aerial minstrel was
seen hovering over the heads of the Clan Chattan, who, after playing a
few wild notes on his pipes, let them drop to the ground. Being made of
glass, they all broke except the chanter, which was made of wood. The
Clan Chattan piper secured the chanter, and, though mortally wounded, he
continued playing the pibroch of his clan until death silenced him. Some
traditions say the original chanter was made of crystal, and, being
broken by the fall, that now existing was made in exact fac-simile,
others that the cracks now seen were those the chanter received on
falling to the ground. In any case, the possession of this particular
chanter was ever after looked on as ensuring success, not only to the
Mac Phersons, but to any one to whom it happened to be lent. The Grants
of Strathspey once received an insult, through the cowardice of some
unworthy members of their clan, and in their dejection they borrowed the
Black Chanter, the war notes of which roused their drooping energies and
stimulated them to such vigour that it became a proverb from that time,
“No one ever saw the back of a Grant.” The Grants of Glenmoriston
afterwards received it, and they restored it to the Mac Phersons about
1855. It is still carefully preserved at Cluny Castle, and some
entertain the belief that on its preservation depends the property of
the house of Cluny.

The Black Chanter seems to have kept its magic power, for, during all
the troubles of the ’45, Cluny Mac Pherson accompanied Prince Charlie in
his victories and helped him much by his own and his followers’ bravery.
But when the final blow was given to the fortunes of Charles Edward at
Drummossie Moor, the Mac Phersons were not there, and it is said that
before the battle an old witch told the Duke of Cumberland that if he
waited until the green banner and the Black Chanter came up he would he
defeated. The battle was over before Cluny arrived, for he was met by
the fugitives when on his way from Badenoch to join the Prince. The Mac
Intoshes, who claim that their chief is the chief of the Clan Mac
Pherson, were at Culloden and in the thickest of the fight, but they had
not the Black Chanter, and so they, too, shared in the defeat. It is
certainly curious that no battle at which the Mac Phersons were present
with the green banner of the clan, the Black Chanter, and the chief at
their head, was lost. We do not, of course, believe in this phase of the
supernatural nowadays, and it has been irreverently asserted that this
particular chanterwill not play, that a piper of Cluny’s who was in the
service of the chief for seven years testified to this, and that it is
nothing more nor less than a chanter that has been spoiled in the
making. We do not contend that it really had supernatural powers—the
probability is all the other way—but when the clan believed it had,
that, by inspiring them with confidence, perhaps served the same
purpose. Many clans and peoples find inspiration in that which to the
sceptical and hypercritical is but a fetish, and though we may smile at
old-time stories of the supernatural, we should remember that those
things were not smiling matter to the people of those days, and that the
people who live as long after us as we live after those who believed in
fairies and other uncanny things are almost sure to find much more to
laugh at in our practice and beliefs than we find in the practice and
beliefs of our ancestors. Meantime, let us close with a piece as grand
as ever was written in any language, dedicated to Culloden and the Black
Chanter of Chattan by Mrs. Ogilvie—remembering that the past deserves
our respect, not only for the brave people it produced, but also for the
legacy of enjoyable song and poetry and tradition it has handed down to
us—

       “Black Chanter of Chattan now hushed and exhausted,
         Thy music was lost with the power of the Gael;
       The dread inspiration Mac Pherson had boasted
         For ever expired in Drummossie’s sad wail.

       “On old St. Johnstone’s dark meadow of slaughter
         Thy cadences buried the piper’s last breath;
       The vanquished escaped amid Tay’s rolling water,
         The conqueror’s pibroch was silenced by death.

       “That piper is nameless, and lost in like manner
         The tribes are forgotten of mighty Clan Quhele;
       While Chattan that bears the hill-cat on his banner,
         No time can extinguish, no ruin assail.

       “From the hand of a cloud-cleaving bard thou wert given
         To lips that embraced thee till nerveless and dead;
       Since then never idly Mac Pherson hath striven,
         Nor trust in his fortune been shaken by dread.

       “O mouth-piece of conquest! who heard thee and trembled?
         Who followed thy call, and despaired of the fight?
       Availed not that foemen before thee dissembled,
         For quenched was their ardour and nerveless their might.

       “The blast of thy pibroch, the plaint of thy streamer,
         Lent hope to each spirit and strength to each arm;
       While the Saxon confronting was scared like the dreamer
         Whose sleep is of peril, of grief, and alarm.

       “Led on by thy promise, what chieftain e’er sallied
         Nor proved in the venture how just was thy vaunt?
       At the spell of thy summons exultingly rallied
         The faltering pulse of dispirited Grant.

       “Forerunner of victory! Why didst thou tarry?
         Thy voice on Drummossie an empire had changed;
       We then had not seen our last efforts miscarry,
         The Stuart had triumphed, the Gael been avenged.

       “Ah, fatal Drummossie—sad field of the flying!
         The Gathering sank in the hopeless Lament;
       What pibroch could stanch the wide wounds of the dying?
         What magic rekindle the fire that was spent?

       “Proud music, by shame or dishonour ne’er daunted,
         By murmur of orphan, by widowed despair,
       The fall of thy country thy spell disenchanted,
         With the last of the Stuarts it vanished in air!

       “Yet rouse thee from slumber, Black Chanter of Chattan,
         Send forth a strong blast of defiance once more;
       On the flesh of thy children the vulture doth fatten,
         And sodden with blood are the sands of Lahore.

       “As fierce as the tiger that prowls in their forest,
         Those sons of the Orient leap to the plain;
       But the blade striketh vainly wherever thou wanest,
         Black Chanter of Chattan bestir thee again!”




                              CHAPTER XVI.
                          PIPERS AND FAIRIES.

        “The green hill cleaves, and forth with a bound
          Comes elf and elfin steed;
        The moon dives down in a golden cloud,
          The stars grow dim with dread;
        But a light is running along the earth,
          So of heaven’s they have no need.
        O’er moor and moss with a shout they pass,
          And the word is spur and speed—
        But the fire maun burn, and I maun quake,
          And the hour is gone that will never come back.”
                                            —_Allan Cunningham._

  In fairies’ hillocks—Stories with a common origin—Sutherlandshire
    version—Away for a year—Harris piper and the fairies—Seven years
    away—Fairies helping pipers—Helping the Mac Crimmons—A boy piper—How
    the music went from Islay to Skye—Faust-like bargains—A Caithness
    story—A fairy piper.


Pipers with a leaning towards the uncanny dealt largely with fairies,
and in West Highland mythology piping is said to have been heard in
fairies’ hillocks. “I know two sisters,” says a boy in a story of Skye—
“one of them is a little deaf—and they heard a sound in a hill, and they
followed the sound, and did they not sit and listen to the piping till
they were seven times tired? There is no question about that.” We do not
believe in those things now. Our forefathers did, however, and there
seems to have been an idea that pipers were special favourites of the
little harmless green-coated ones. It is, indeed, their association with
fairies that provides the most interesting of all the stories about
pipers. There are ever so many stories of their adventures in the
fairies’ mounds and caves, and, like other classes of Celtic tales, they
all run in one groove though they are located as far distant as Scotland
is long. Like the story of _Faust_, where a man sells his soul for a
period of worldly pleasure, so the story of the piper who goes to the
fairies for a while, and sometimes comes back again, permeates all the
literature of its class. It turns up all over Scotland, it has been
heard often in Ireland, and even in the Scilly Isles it is known. It
does not require much ingenuity to show that those legends have all been
derived from one original story. The same remark, however, applies to
the legendary lore of the entire Celtic race—Scottish, Irish and
Continental. Divested of “trimmings” added by the passing of ages and
the difference in circumstances, Celtic stories are found to have so
much in common as to create strong presumptive evidence that the race
must some time or other have lived together, a united people, a mighty
scattering taking place afterwards, during which the Celts spread
themselves over the world, carrying their folk-lore with them. That is
one theory regarding the race, and this singular fact about its
traditions is one of the strongest arguments in its favour.

Perhaps the most concise version of the fairy story comes from
Sutherlandshire. A man whose wife had just been delivered of her first-
born set off with a friend to the village of Lairg to have the child’s
birth entered in the session books, and to buy a cask of whisky for the
christening. As they returned, weary with the day’s walk, they sat down
to rest at the foot of the hill of Durcha, on the estate of Rosehall,
near a large hole, from which they were ere long astonished to hear the
sounds of piping and dancing. The father, feeling very curious, entered
the cavern, went in a few steps, and disappeared. The other man waited
for a while, but had to go home without his friend. After a week or two
had passed, and the christening was over, and still there was no sign of
the father’s return, the friend was accused of murder. He denied the
charge again and again, and repeated the tale of how the child’s father
had disappeared into the cavern. At last he asked for a year and a day
in which to clear himself of the charge. He repaired often at dusk to
the fatal spot and called for his friend, and prayed, but the time
allowed him was all spent except one day, and nothing had happened. In
the gloaming of that day, as he sat by the hillside, he saw what seemed
to be his friend’s shadow pass into the opening. He followed it, and,
passing inside, heard tunes on the pipes, and saw the missing man
tripping merrily with the fairies. He caught him by the sleeve and
pulled him out. “Bless me, Sandy!” cried the father, “why could you not
let me finish my reel.” “Bless me!” replied Sandy, “have you not had
enough of reeling this last twelvemonth?” “Last twelvemonth!” cried the
other in amazement, nor would he believe the truth concerning himself
till he found his wife sitting by the door with a year-old child in her
arms. The time passed quickly in the company of the good people.

Here, again, is perhaps the best of the long stories of pipers and
fairies. It is from the _Celtic Magazine_, so ably conducted by the late
Alexander Mac Kenzie:—

  “Jamie Gow, a celebrated piper of many, many years ago, lived at
  Niskisher, in Harris. He had a croft, but neglected it for the pipes,
  which brought him his livelihood. His home was five miles from a
  famous fairy knoll, in which thousands of fairies were. Till Jamie’s
  time no one ever found the entrance. It was said that if a piper
  played a certain tune three times round the base of the knoll, going
  against the sun, he would discover the door, but this no hero of the
  chanter had previously attempted.

  “Among a number of drouthy neighbours one day a debate got up as to
  the nature of the inside of the knoll. Jamie Gow declared that he
  would for a gallon of brandy play round the knoll in the proper way,
  and if he found the door he would enter and play the fairies a tune
  better than anything they had ever danced to. A score of voices cried
  “done,” and the bargain was made. About noon on the following day
  Jamie, after partaking of something to keep his courage up, proceeded
  to _Tom-na-Sithichean_, the Fairy Knoll. He was accompanied by scores
  of people, some cheering, some discouraging him. On reaching the knoll
  he emptied other two “coggies,” took up his position, and began to
  play. As soon as the first skirl of his pipes was heard all the people
  fled to the top of an adjoining hill to wait the result. With a slow
  but steady step Jamie marched round the _Tom_. Twice he completed his
  journey without mishap, and he had almost finished the third round.
  But when within two or three paces of the end he was seen to stand for
  a moment and then disappear. There was an opening in the side of the
  hill, which admitted him to a long dark passage, so rugged and uneven
  as to make it most inconvenient for a piper to keep marching and
  playing a particular tune, as Jamie was. The air, too, was chilly and
  disagreeable, drops of water continually trickling down the cold damp
  sides of the passage. Jamie, however, marched on fearlessly, and
  strange to say the farther he went the lighter grew his step and the
  livelier his tune. By and by the long passage became illuminated with
  a faint light, by which he saw that the roof and sides were very
  thickly covered with short and starry pendants, which shone white and
  radiant, like marble. Forward still, till he reached a door which
  opened of its own accord and led into a chamber of indescribable
  splendour. The floor seemed of solid silver, the walls of pure gold,
  and the furniture most costly. Around the table sat hundreds of lovely
  women and smiling men, all perfect in form and clothed in spotless
  green, brilliant and rich beyond description. They had apparently
  finished a sumptuous dinner, and were now quaffing the purple juice of
  the grape out of diamond-mounted cups of exquisite beauty.

  “At the sight of such splendour, the piper for a moment was amazed,
  the drones fell powerless on his arm, for he stood with open mouth,
  ceasing to blow his bag. Noticing this, one of the green gentlemen
  rose from his seat, and, smiling coyly, handed him a cup of wine to
  drink, which Jamie loved too dearly to refuse. So, taking the
  proffered cup, with thanks, he said—‘I am a piper to my trade. I have
  travelled and played from one end of the island to the other, but such
  a pretty place and such lovely people I never saw.’ And he quaffed the
  cup at one draught.

  “The gentleman in green then asked if he would favour the company with
  a tune called ‘The Fairy Dance,’ at which they knew he excelled all
  other performers. Nothing pleased Jamie better than a little puffing—
  this, probably, the inhabitants of the knoll knew—and he replied
  lustily, ‘And, by my faith, I will, and I will play it as true as ever
  any piper played a tune.’ In a moment the vast assembly was on its
  feet, swinging from side to side in a long country dance. Nothing that
  Jamie had ever seen compared to the graceful manner in which both
  ladies and gentlemen performed their evolutions, and this encouraged
  him to blow with might and main and stamp hastily with both feet, as
  if inspired, like the other performers.

  “Meanwhile the people who had accompanied Jamie surrounded the knoll
  in search of him. They saw the spot where he disappeared, and some
  asserted that they saw the door itself, but when they came near the
  place there was no door. They continued the search for weeks, looking
  and listening in the hope of hearing the well-known notes of his
  chanter, but without success. Years passed, and Jamie did not return.
  The story of his disappearance at the knoll had spread far and wide,
  and his fate was the subject of conversation at many gatherings
  throughout the Western Isles. But though he was sadly missed at the
  balls and weddings, no one missed or pined for Jamie like his widowed
  mother and his sweetheart, _Mairi Nighean Gilleam_, to whom he was to
  have been married shortly after he left on his rash journey round the
  knoll.

  “For several years Jamie continued to play ‘The Fairy Dance,’ and the
  dancers seemed as fresh as when he began. At long last the piper,
  wearied almost out of breath, cried ‘May God bless you, friends! my
  breath is almost gone.’ The mention of the Great Name produced a
  revolution. In a moment all lights were out, the beautifully clad
  assemblage and the gorgeous hall immediately disappeared, and Jamie
  found himself standing on the top of Tomnahurich, at Inverness. Until
  he inquired at a cottage in the vicinity he was entirely ignorant of
  his surroundings, but as soon as he found out where he was he made
  direct for Harris, reaching there after a journey of six weeks.

  “Jamie was seven years with the fairies. When he got back to Harris he
  found his cottage deserted, for his mother had died a year before. No
  one in the place recognised him, he was so changed. His beard reached
  to his girdle, his cheeks were bulged out to a prodigious size by the
  continual blowing of his pipes, and his mouth was twice its original
  proportions. _Mairi Nighean Uilleam_ knew him by his voice, and a few
  weeks after they became man and wife. Jamie never again visited _Tom-
  na-Sithichean_.”

I should think not. He had had quite enough of the fairies. They,
however, seem to have had a soft side to pipers, at least we often read
of them helping the musicians with their music. The first story which
illustrates this comes from one of the Inner Hebrides, and is given in
J. F. Campbell’s _Tales of the West Highlands_, the actual words of the
narrator being used. It was told in a houseful of people, all of whom
seemed to believe it:—

  “There was a piper in this island and he had three sons. The two
  eldest learned the pipes, and they were coming on famously, but the
  youngest could not learn at all. At last, one day, he was going about
  in the evening very sorrowfully, when he saw _bruth_, a fairy hillock,
  laid open. (There was one close to the house, which was exactly like
  the rest of its class. It was afterwards levelled and human bones were
  found in it.) He went up to the door and stuck his knife into it,
  because he had heard from old people that if he did that the _slaugh_
  could not shut the door. Well, the fairies were very angry, and asked
  him what he wanted, but he was not a bit afraid. He told them he could
  not play the pipes a bit, and asked them to help him. They gave him
  _feadan dubh_, a black chanter, but he said: ‘That’s no use to me for
  I don’t know how to play it.’

  “Then they came about him and showed him how to move his fingers; that
  he was to lift that one and lay down that, and when he had been with
  them a while he thanked them and took out his knife and went away, and
  the _bruth_ closed after him.

  “Now, that man became one of the most famous pipers, and his people
  were alive until very lately. I am sure you all know that.”

  _Chorus_—“Oh yes, yes indeed. It is certain that there were such
  people whether they are now or not.”

If all tales be true, the fairies had something to do with the eminent
genius of the Mac Crimmons themselves. Once upon a time, to use the
proper phrase, there was a great gathering of the clans at Dunvegan
Castle. Mac Leod was entertaining the chiefs, and each chief was
accompanied by his piper. The chiefs were great and the pipers were
great, and somehow it was agreed that there should be a trial of skill
among the musicians present—twelve in all. Mac Leod himself directed the
proceedings, and one by one the great instrumentalists stepped into the
hall and made the rafters dirl with their well-known strains. But Mac
Leod became anxious as he noticed that there was no sign of his own
piper, the old piper who had served him so long. He sent a boy to
search, and the boy returned with the sad news—the piper was hopelessly
drunk. The brow of Mac Leod grew dark with anger, for he was not to be
humbled in his own household and in the presence of his guests. The
tenth piper was tuning up—there was but another, and then his disgrace
would be public property. In the desperation of despair Mac Leod seized
the boy by the hand and whispered: “You are the twelfth piper, remember
your chief’s words.” The boy, Mac Crimmon by name, left the hall, while
the feasting and fun went on as merrily as ever, and lay down on the
hillside and bemoaned his fate. But his good fairy was not far away. She
came right out of the ground, as pretty a little fairy as ever helped
poor mortal in desperate plight. She knew his trouble, and did not waste
words, but gave the distracted boy a curiously-shaped whistle, and bade
him play on it. The youngster would do anything to oblige the kind lady,
so he blew on the whistle, and lo! the hills and the rocks re-echoed
with the finest music ever heard in Skye. The good fairy disappeared,
and the boy ran back to the castle, where the eleventh piper was playing
the last notes of his pibroch. The chiefs and the pipers laughed to see
the boy step it out into the centre of the assembled company, but their
scorn was turned to admiration as compositions played in faultless and
brilliant manner poured from the boy’s “pipes.” Thenceforth Mac Crimmon
was prince of pipers, and we do not read that ever the good fairy came
back to claim any recompense for what she had done; neither have we any
explanation of why she gave him a whistle (? a chanter) and not a set of
pipes right off.

Another story of the Mac Crimmons, but one that has not many points of
resemblance to the other, is told by Lord Archibald Campbell in _Records
of Argyll_. It is from the lips of Hector Mac Lean, of Islay, and tells
of how, when Mac Donald of the Isles resided in the palace on Finlagan
Isle, in Loch Finlagan, he had a ploughman who, from his large stature,
was called the Big Ploughman. This ploughman was out one day at his
work, and he had a boy with him driving the horses, as was the custom in
those times. The Big Ploughman was seized with hunger, and he said to
the boy:

“My good fellow, were it to be got in the ordinary way, or magically, I
would take food in the meantime, were I to have it.”

After he had said these words, he and the boy took another turn with the
team, till they came to the side of Knockshainta. There was an old grey-
haired man by the side of the hill, who had a table covered with all
manner of eatables. He asked them to come and partake of what was on the
table. The ploughman went, but the boy was frightened, and would not go.
After the ploughman had eaten enough, the old man gave him a chanter to
play. When he put his fingers to it, he, who had never played before,
played as well as any piper that ever was in the island of Islay. A day
or two after, Mac Donald heard, in his palace on Island Finlagan, the
Big Ploughman playing the Black Chanter. He inquired who it was, and
they told him it was the Big Ploughman. When he heard how well the
ploughman played there was nothing for it but to get for him the bagpipe
of the three drones, and he was Mac Donald’s piper as long as he lived.

Mac Donald went on a trip to the Isle of Skye. He took with him from
thence a young man of the name of Mac Crimmon, who was fond of music,
and was doing a little at it. He went to the Big Ploughman to learn more
music from him than he had already. Mac Crimmon and the ploughman’s
daughter began courting and in consequence of the fancy that the girl
took to Mac Crimmon—believing that he would marry her—she took the Black
Chanter unknown to her father out of the chest, and gave it to Mac
Crimmon to try it. When Mac Crimmon tried it he could play as well as
the Big Ploughman himself. The girl asked the chanter back, but he
entreated her to let him have it for a few days until he should practise
a little further on it. A short time after Mac Donald of the Isles went
off to Skye, and Mac Crimmon went with him. He did not return the
chanter, neither did he come back to marry the Big Ploughman’s daughter.
The people of Islay say it was in this way that the music went from
Islay to the Isle of Skye.

“The Powers” were not always so unselfishly inclined as the stories
already given make them appear. They often drove a Faust-like bargain
with the piper. They did with Peter Waters, a Caithness lad, who, when
driving home his cattle one day over the common in the parish of Olrig,
stopped to quench his thirst at a spring which flowed from the side of a
well-known fairies’ hillock called Sysa. Peter was tired, the spot was
quiet, and the air invited him to slumber. So he slept till near sunset,
when he was awakened by a gentle shake of the shoulder. Starting up, he
saw a most beautiful lady, dressed in green, with golden ringlets, blue
eyes, and the sweetest countenance in the world, standing beside him.
Peter was shy, and his first impulse was to run away, but the lady
looked at him and he couldn’t.

“Don’t be afraid of me, Peter,” she said, with one of her most
captivating smiles, and with a voice soft and clear as a silver bell. “I
feel a great interest in you, and I am come to make a man of you.”

“I am much obliged to you, indeed,” stammered Peter. “The greatest
nobleman in the land might be proud of your fair hand, but I have no
desire to enter into the silken cord; and, besides, I would require to
be better acquainted with you before I took such a step. People commonly
court a little before they marry.”

The lady laughed.

“You mistake me altogether,” said she. “Though you appear a very nice
young man, I make no offer of my hand. What I mean is that I will put
you in the way of rising in the world and making your fortune. Here are
two things—a Book and a pipe. Make your choice of the one or the other.
If you take the Book you will become the most popular preacher in the
north, and if you take the pipe you will be the best piper in Scotland.
I shall give you five minutes to consider,” and she took from her bosom
a golden time-piece about the size of a sovereign.

The book was a splendidly bound Bible, richly embossed with gold, and
with a golden clasp; the pipe a beautiful instrument, with a green silk
bag of gold and silver tissue, and superbly finished with a number of
silver keys. Peter gazed in admiration on the articles, and was greatly
puzzled. It would be a grand thing, he thought, to be a popular
preacher, to have a manse and glebe, and be fit company for the laird
and his lady. But he was an enthusiast for music, and he should like
above all things to be able to play the bagpipe. So he said—

“Since you are so kind, I think I will choose the pipe; but as I have
never fingered a chanter in my life, I fear it will be a long time
before I learn to play such a difficult instrument.”

“No fear of that,” said the lady. “Blow up, and you’ll find that the
pipe of its own accord will discourse the most eloquent music.”

Peter did as he was desired, and lo! he played “Maggie Lauder” in
splendid style—so splendidly that the cattle near by began capering
about in the most extraordinary manner.

“This is perfectly wonderful,” he said. “There must surely be some
glamour about this instrument.”

He thanked the lady, and was about to take his departure, when she
stopped him with—

“Stop a minute. There is a condition attached to the gift. This day
seven years, at the very same hour in the evening, you must meet me by
moonlight at the Well of Sysa. Swear by its enchanted spring that you
will do so.”

Peter was elated over his new acquisition, and rashly swore as she
desired. Then he went home to his father’s farm, the “Windy Ha’.” With
an air of triumph he produced his pipes, which excited much curiosity,
and were greatly admired. But when he told how he came by them, the old
people were fearful.

“It’s no canny, Peter,” said his father, shaking his head, “and I would
advise you to have nothing to do with it.”

“The Best protect us!” exclaimed his mother, “my bairn is lost. He must
have got it from none other than the Queen of the Fairies.”

“Nonsense,” said Peter; “it was not the Queen of the Fairies, but a real
lady—and a kind and beautiful lady she was—that gave me the pipes.”

“But of what use can they be to you,” said his father, “when you canna
play them?”

“I’ll let you see that,” Peter replied, and, putting the wind pipe to
his mouth, he played the “Fairy Dance” in a style that electrified the
household. The whole family, including the grandmother, ninety years of
age, started to their feet, and danced heartily, overturning stools and
scattering the fire, which was in the middle of the floor, with their
fantastic movements. The piper played as if he would never stop.

At length his father, panting for breath and with the perspiration
running down his cheeks, cried out, “For mercy’s sake, Peter, gie ower,
or you’ll be the death o’ me and yer mither, as well as poor old
grannie.”

“I think,” said Peter, laying aside his pipes, “I think you’ll no longer
say that I cannot play,” and from that time his fame as a piper spread
rapidly, and he was sent for to perform at weddings and merrymakings all
over the country, till he realised a small fortune. But the seven years
soon rolled away, and the afternoon arrived when he must keep his
appointment with the donor of the pipes. Rover, the house dog, attempted
to follow him, and when he was sent back he gazed after his master as
far as he could see him, and then howled long and piteously. The evening
was just such another as that seven years before, and the hillock of
Sysa seemed, in the yellow radiance of the setting sun, to glow with
unearthly splendour. Peter went, but he never returned, and the general
belief was that he was carried away to Fairyland. At any rate, he was
never again seen at Windy Ha’.

Not only did the fairies take an interest in pipers, but they played the
pipes themselves. In one case where, after a deal of trouble, a young
man, Charlie Mac Lean by name, got nearly to the Fairies’ Palace in
search of his beautiful young wife, who had been stolen to nurse the
young prince of the fairies, he was met by a withered “atomy” of a man,
finely dressed, with a cocked hat on his head and a magnificent set of
pipes under his arm.

“A happy May eve to you, Charlie Mac Lean,” said the little man, coming
up with a dignified bow.

“The same to you, sir, and many,” Charlie replied. “May I ask where this
road leads?”

“Why, you goose, don’t you know? It leads to the Fairies’ Palace. Don’t
you be trying your tricks on travellers, my fine fellow. However, come
on. I’ll lead the way, no matter who plays the pipes.”

With that he tuned up his pipes and marched along, Charlie following.
“What tune do you like?” said he, turning round suddenly.

“Oh! _Cailleach Liath Rarsair_,” answered Charlie, scarcely knowing what
he said.

“It’s a capital tune,” said the “atomy,” and immediately striking it up,
he played with such life and spirit that Charlie felt able to fight the
whole fairy court for his wife.

“Now,” said the little piper, as he finished the tune, “I haven’t time
to play more, else I’d give you the prettiest pibroch ever was battered
through a chanter. I must be going. Look up, there is the palace before
your eyes. One you know bade me tell you to stand in the porch till the
company comes out to the green. Your wife will be among them. A word to
a sensible man is enough. You have the purse of dust in your pocket:
(Charlie had got this from a ‘wise man’ before setting out on the
journey); use it, I say, use it, whenever you see your wife.” With that
he struck up “Charlie is my darling,” and marched back the way he had
come.

Charlie got his wife all right, by following the advice of the “wise
man” and the “atomy,” but that part of the story has nought to do with
pipers.

[Illustration:

  UAMH AN OIR: THE CAVE OF GOLD
]




                             CHAPTER XVII.
                       PIPERS IN ENCHANTED CAVES.

     “The Banshee’s wild voice sings the death dirge before me,
     The pall of the dead for a mantle hangs o’er me;
     But my heart shall not flag and my nerve shall not shiver,
     Though devoted I go—to return again never!”
                                                         —_Scott._

  Allied to fairy stories—Venturesome pipers—The Skye cave—The Mull
    version—The Argyllshire—The Ghostly piper of Dunderave—“Wandering
    Willie’s Tale”—A Sutherlandshire cave—A Caithness story—Underground
    passages.


The story of a piper endeavouring to explore a mysterious cave is so
closely allied to the class dealt with in last chapter, that all might
quite fairly have been included under one heading. The only difference
often is that in the one case the piper enters a cave opening out to the
sea, whereas in the other he enters a knoll, which may be any distance
inland. There are always fairies in the knoll, but in the majority of
cases there are none in the cave. Their place is taken by wild beasts,
who take the life of the venturesome explorer. The piper generally has a
dog with him when he enters the cave, and the dog always returns, though
the last that is heard of his master is the sad wail of his pipes
playing a lament for his own terrible fate.

“Oh, that I had three hands—two for the pipes and one for the sword,” is
recorded as the tune played by a piper who entered a cavern and could
not get out again. The incident is located in several places—in Skye, in
Mull, and at a cave eight miles up the river Nevis, in Inverness-shire.
The Mull cave reached, it was believed, right across the island, and it
was inhabited by wolves and other wild animals. The Skye cave was called
_Uamh an Oir_, the Cave of Gold, and was situated about four miles from
Dunvegan, the other end opening out at Monkstad on Loch Snizort. It,
too, had wild animals for inhabitants. The inside of the cave in most
cases consisted of many confusing offshoots leading in different
directions, the want of knowledge of which prevented the people of the
neighbouring districts from exploring it. However, on one occasion a
piper (the Skye version makes him a Mac Crimmon) accompanied by a member
of the Clan Mac Leod (also the Skye version) made bold to enter the
cave. A crowd gathered outside to wait for the result. The piper, who of
course had his pipes, went first, playing his best. After a considerable
time had elapsed, the waiting people began to feel anxious as to their
safety. But by and by Mac Leod returned. He could give no account of Mac
Crimmon except that he had lost him in the labyrinths of the cave. He
considered himself extremely fortunate in finding his way out. Their
torches had been extinguished by the dim and foul atmosphere. Just when
Mac Leod was telling his story the wailing notes of Mac Crimmon’s pipes
were heard issuing from the cave. All listened, and as they listened the
pipes spoke, and the notes that came out of the darkness represented:—

         “I will return, I will return, I will return no more;
         Mac Leod may return, but Mac Crimmon shall never.”

And also:—

     “The she wolf, the she wolf, the she wolf follows me;
     Oh for three hands; two for the pipes and one for the sword.”

And so on the wailing notes continued, the piper bewailing his fate in
that he could not stop his playing for an instant, because if he did
this the wolf would attack him. So long as he played he was safe.
Ultimately he began to speak of how long his strength would last,
sometimes coming near to the mouth of the cave, but anon wandering away
again into its recesses till the music was scarcely audible. This went
on all that day and night, but in the early morning the listeners heard
the music cease, and they knew that exhaustion had overtaken the piper,
and that the wolf had conquered.

This is the story as I had it from an old lady still living in
Glenquoich, Inverness-shire. Another version has it that this Mac
Crimmon had twelve other men with him, that none of them ever returned,
having been met by an _uile bheisd_ or monster, and devoured. The last
despairing notes of the piper were heard by a person sitting at _Tobar
Tulach_ in the neighbourhood, who listened to the lament as it came up
from the bottom of a well.

The Mull story is told of two of a wedding party who entered the cave
and never came out, and also of twelve men of the Clan Mac Kinnon, who,
headed by a piper, attempted to explore the cave. In the latter case
another party walked along the top keeping pace with the music below.
When the party who travelled in the cave arrived at the end, the fact
was to be signalled to those outside by a certain bar of music, and they
were to mark the spot to indicate the termination of the cave. After the
explorers had travelled some distance they encountered a fairy woman,
who attacked the band and slew them one by one. She was, however, so
charmed with the music of the pipes that she offered no injury to the
person who played them. The poor piper made the best of his way back to
the mouth of the cave followed by the fairy, she meanwhile informing him
that if he ceased playing before he saw the light of day he too would be
killed. He staggered along in the dark, bravely playing out his life
breath, but at last, in spite of his struggles, the music ceased. The
charm was then broken and the piper shared the fate of his comrades.
Those outside knew that something had happened and with drawn swords
rushed into the cave. They found the dead piper and his comrades. The
last notes he played, says the tradition, were:—

               “Alas! that I had not three hands—
               Two for the pipes and one for the sword.”

This identifies the story as just a variation of the others, though how
it comes to be located in so many different places it is difficult to
explain. In connection with the Mac Kinnon exploring adventure, it may
be added, the tradition further tells of how a dog accompanied the
party, and emerged from the cave at some other place, but bereft of his
hair. He had been in a death struggle with some monster inside and had
escaped.

The dog, the same dog presumably, went into an Argyllshire cave with a
piper. There are many large caves on the Kintyre coast, one of the
biggest being at Keill. This cave was long the resort of smugglers, and
was said to possess a subterranean passage extending six miles from the
mouth of the cave to the hill of Kilellan. It was haunted, and whosoever
would penetrate beyond a certain distance would never again be heard of
(a very convenient tradition for smugglers). A piper, however, made up
his mind to explore its inmost recesses, and, accompanied by his dog, a
little terrier, he set out on the expedition, while his friends watched
and listened at the cavern’s mouth. The piper went in boldly, blowing
his pipes till the cave resounded. His friends heard his music becoming
gradually fainter and fainter until all at once, when, as they supposed,
he had passed the fatal boundary, his pipes were heard to give an
unearthly and tremendous skirl, while an eildrich laugh re-echoed
through the cave. The terrier shortly after came running out, but
without his skin. In process of time he obtained a fresh skin, but he
never tried to bark after that adventure. As for the piper, his fate was
purely a matter of conjecture, but he is supposed to have stumbled in
the subterranean passage, for about five miles from the cavern’s mouth
there was a farm house, and underneath its hearthstone the piper was, in
after years, often heard playing his favourite tune, and occasionally
stopping to ejaculate—

                          “I doubt, I doubt
                          I’ll ne’er get out.”

Then there is the tale of the ghostly piper of Dunderave. At certain
times his music was heard issuing from a cavern which faced the sea, and
into the recesses of which the waves swept. On winter nights the sounds
that came from that cavern were wild and unaccountable, and often the
fishermen in the vicinity were startled by fierce, bloodcurdling yells,
especially in the early morning. When the tide went out the children of
the village, unaware of its terrible mystery, strayed near the yawning
cavern, and occasionally sad hearts were made by the disappearance of
the little ones who wandered too far in. The legend of Dunderave was
that the seventh son of the seventh son of a Mac Gregor, who would play
the gathering of his clan in the cavern, would scatter for ever the evil
spirits who frequented it. A piper, who thought he had the necessary
qualifications, was got, and he had the courage to play in the cavern of
Dunderave. Whether he played the gathering of his clan satisfactorily or
not could never be known, but certainly he never came out of the cave,
the mouth of which fell in after him, blocking up the cavern for ever.
No more children were lost, but ever after there could be heard by
anyone standing over the cavern, the faint music of Mac Gregor’s pipes.

Wandering Willie’s tale in _Redgauntlet_ is much too long to quote
entire. In it Steenie the Piper, who has paid his rent to the dead Sir
Robert Redgauntlet, is threatened with eviction by the next laird
because he has not a receipt, and when riding home through the darkness
in great perplexity of mind, is accosted by a stranger, who guides him
to an unearthly place, where he finds Sir Robert and many people whom he
knew were dead gathered round the festal board. He demands his receipt
from Sir Robert, but the laird, or rather “the something that was like
him,” asks him to play up “Weel Hoddled, Luckie,” a tune he had learned
from a warlock, that heard it when they were worshipping Satan at their
meetings, and which he never played willingly. Now he grew cauld at the
name of it, and said, for excuse, he hadna his pipes wi’ him:—

  “‘Mac Callum, ye limb of Beelzebub,’ said the fearfu’ Sir Robert,
  ‘bring Steenie pipes that I am keeping for him.’

  “Mac Callum brought a pair of pipes that might have served the piper
  of Donald of the Isles. But he gave my gudesire a nudge as he offered
  them; and, looking secretly and closely, Steenie saw that the chanter
  was of steel, and heated to a white heat, so he had fair warning not
  to trust his fingers with it. So he excused himself again, and said he
  was faint and frightened and had not wind aneugh to fill the bag.

  “‘Then ye maun eat and drink, Steenie,’ said the figure, ‘for we do
  little else here, and its ill speaking between a fu’ man and a
  fasting.’

  “But Steenie was not to be cajoled or threatened into any more
  transactions with the ghostly crew than he could help, so he spoke up
  like a man, and said he came neither to eat or drink or make
  minstrelsy, but simply for his receipt, which in a rage ‘the
  appearance’ gave him. Then, when Sir Robert stipulated that the piper
  should return after a twelvemonth to pay homage, Steenie’s tongue
  loosened yet more, and he exclaimed:—

  “‘I refer mysel’ to God’s pleasure and not to yours.’”

Whereupon, as in all other tales of the kind, at the mention of the
sacred Name, “all was dark around him, and he sunk on the earth with
such a sudden shock that he lost both breath and sense.” When he came
round he was lying in the kailyard of Redgauntlet, and he would have
thought the whole experience but a dream, only he had the receipt in his
hand fairly written and signed by the auld laird, and dated “From my
appointed place, this twenty-fifth day of November,” the previous day,
in fact. This he carried to the new laird, who accepted it as evidence
of the rent having been paid, but made Steenie swear never to divulge
his adventure.

Away up in the north, too, we come across stories connected with caves
into which pipers went. At Durness, in Sutherlandshire, a piper went
into a cave and never returned. According to the version current in the
locality, the Devil himself got hold of the venturesome explorer and
kept him. From Caithness we get something better. A piper, in a spirit
of braggadocia, as is often the case in these stories, entered a cave
near Dunnet Head. Jock was “a stout, long-winded chap,”

              “Who was a piper to his trade,
              And by his trusty chanter earned his bread,”

and the fairies had often heard him play and wished to get him to take
the place of their own piper, who had died. Though they were immortal
themselves, they had not a piper of their own race, and when they got
one from among mankind they could not make him immortal. Jock lived near
a famous cave called Puddingoe, the inmost recesses of which no man had
ever explored, and one day he laid a wager that he would play up
Puddingoe and see how far it went.

           “‘For,’ added Jock, ‘though Nick’s a roguish elf,
             I canna think he’d harm a hair o’ me,
           For he is just a piper like myself,
             And dearly loves, I’m told, a funny spree—
           Nae doot then he would treat me as a brither,
           And we would play a merry jig together.’”

Then he “quaffed a cog of prime home-brewed” and hied him to the cave,
and entered, screwing up his drones and beginning a lively march that
startled the wild pigeons from their ledges and echoed among the
recesses of the walls. Farther and farther he went, past the dripping
sides of cold, damp stone and through the dark, chilly air till at last,
strange to say, the darkness was dispelled and the cave became
illuminated with a light like that of the moon. Jock was, he reckoned,
about two miles underground when all at once he came to a door, which
opened of its own accord and admitted him into a chamber of exceeding
beauty. The floor was inlaid with silver, the walls seemed burnished
gold, and a jovial party of ladies and gentlemen banquetted at a
splendidly spread table. The piper stood amazed for a moment, until one
of the company handed him a glass of wine.

          “‘I am a piper to my trade,’ cried Jock,
            Am I upon the earth, or where am I?
          I never saw before such beauteous folk,
            Or such a chamber with my naked eye;
          Here’s a’ yir healths,’ and saying this he quaffed
          The brimming cup and smacked his lips and laughed.”

Then, of course, the fairies asked him to play, which Jock did, and the
party danced, and danced, and danced, until Jock cried—

                                 “Lord save’s, ohon!
               Have mercy on my soul, my breath is gone.”

This had the inevitable result. The lights went out with a fiery hissing
sound, the party vanished, as well as the gorgeous hall, and when Jock
again came to himself he found that he was on the top of an elf-haunted
knowe in the vicinity. He had been a year and a day away from home, his
friends had given him up as dead, and his features were so changed that
they did not recognise him when he returned. With the long spell of
blowing his mouth was distended, which also helped to disguise him. But
he made himself known, and was duly received by his friends and his
sweetheart, and he married shortly after. But, as J. T. Calder, the
historian of Caithness, who tells the legend in rhyme, says—

            “Never after was he seen to enter
            The enchanted cave in quest of fresh adventure.”

A slight variation of the cave stories are the stories of underground
passages. There is, for instance, the passage that is supposed to exist
between Edinburgh Castle and Holyrood Palace. The piper went in at the
Castle end, intending to play all the way to Holyrood. His pipes were
heard as far as the Tron Church, but then the music ceased. It did not
start again, and the piper was never more heard of.

A similar legend is referred to by Hugh Mac Donald in his ramble,
_Rutherglen and Cathkin_. It is to the effect that Glasgow Cathedral was
built by the “wee pechs (Picts) who had their domicile in Rutherglen.”
Instead, however, of making their journeys overland, they dug an
underground passage, through which they came and went. Even in Mac
Donald’s youth, those who doubted this story were silenced and awed by
the solemn assurance that a Highland piper, to put down the sceptics,
had volunteered to explore the dark road. He was accompanied by his dog,
and he entered playing a cheery tune, as if confident of a successful
result. But “he was never seen or heard tell o’ again.” Only the sound
of his pipes was heard as he passed underneath Dalmarnock, playing in a
mournful key, which suggested the words, “I doot, I doot, I’ll ne’er get
oot.” Another version tells, however, that his poor dog returned, but
without its skin. According to a Glasgow ballad, it was a dominie who
ventured to explore the secret path. He encountered the Deil and other
“friends,” who blew him up through the waters of the Clyde, and the
point at which he emerged is known to this day as “The Dominie’s Hole.”




                             CHAPTER XVIII.
                         THE HEREDITARY PIPERS.

                                      “’Tis wonderful,
          That an invisible instinct should frame them,
          To loyalty unlearned; honour untaught;
          Civility not seen from others; valour
          That wildly grows in them, but yields a crop
          As if it had been sowed.”
                                              —_Shakespeare._

  Hereditary in two senses—When they ceased—The Mac Crimmons—A
    traditional genealogy—A Mac Gregor tradition—The Mac Crimmon
    College—Dr. Johnson—College broken up—An Irish college—Its system—A
    Mac Crimmon’s escapades—Respect for the Mac Crimmons—The Rout of
    Moy—The last of the race—How they excelled—The Mac Arthurs—The Mac
    Intyres—The Mac Kays—The Rankins—The Campbells—The Mac Gregors.


The hereditary pipers were hereditary in at least two senses. They were
hereditary because son followed father, generation after generation, in
the service of one chief, no one disputing their claim to the
succession. But they were also hereditary in the sense that their
talents were not self-acquired. They came of a race of pipers, and
piping to them was hereditary. Seven generations of pipers for ancestors
and seven years of personal training were considered necessary to
produce the true hereditary piper. It is this to which Neil Munro
alludes when he says—“To the make of a piper go seven years of his own
learning and seven generations before.”

The hereditary pipers were second only to the chiefs of the various
clans, and their fame has come down through the years with wonderful
persistence. The chiefs were proud of their pipers and treated them as
gentlemen. The pipers, on their part, were proud of their chiefs, and
would do anything for them. Hereditary pipers existed until the passing
of the Heritable Jurisdiction Abolition Act of 1747, which, by
abolishing clanship, made the possession of a retinue by a chief an
offence against the civil law. The chiefs then deprived their pipers of
the lands they had formerly held by virtue of their office, and by that
act degraded them to the level of ordinary musicians. And, with the
absence of a sure position, the enthusiasm for pipe music dwindled,
succeeding generations failed to attain to the high level of their
forebears, and the hereditary pipers were merged in the general race of
Highland musicians.

The greatest of the hereditary pipers were

                           THE MAC CRIMMONS,

pipers to Mac Leod of Dunvegan. There is nothing to show how or where
the race originated. Some traditions state that the first Mac Crimmon
came from Cremona in Italy, and was named Donald. He settled in Glenelg,
and had a son named _Iain Odhar_, who, about 1600, became the first
piper to the family of Mac Leod. This traditional genealogical tree,
supplied originally by a man who had seen the wife of him who, according
to the tradition, was the last of the Mac Crimmon pipers to Mac Leod of
Mac Leod, shows that a direct descent from this _Iain Odhar_ was:—

[Illustration:

  SUPPOSED TO REPRESENT A MAC CRIMMON PLAYING A SALUTE

  (From _Mac Ian’s Clans_.)
]

  Malcolm, married, with issue:—

      1. John, who succeeded him as piper.

      2. Donald (Roy), D.S.P.

      3. Rachel, who married in Glendale.

      4. A daughter who died unmarried.

  John (_Dubh_) married first a Mac Askill, with issue:—

   1. Donald, D.S.P., a Captain in the Army.

   2. Peter, D.S.P., a Captain in the Army, and considered one of the
        strongest men of his day. Emigrated to Cape Coast Castle.

   3. Malcolm, married in Ardrossan, with several sons.

   4. Elizabeth, married a cooper of the name of Mac Kinnon, in Islay.
        Had two daughters—(_a_) Mary Ann, married Malcolm Mac Leod,
        Shipmaster, Lochmaddy, with issue; (_b_) Effie, married
        Chisholm, Tacksman, of Gairnish, South Uist, with issue.

   5. Janet, married a Ferguson, in America, with issue, an only
        daughter, who resided in Greenock.

   6. Flora, who married Mac Donald, Tacksman, of Pein-a-Daorir, South
        Uist, factor for South Uist.

   7. Marion, married, with issue.

   8. Catherine, married with issue.

  John, married secondly Ann Campbell, with issue:—

   9. Duncan, married a Mac Queen, with issue—(_a_) John, who went to
        New Zealand; (_b_) Donald, who married a Mac Leod, went to
        America, and had a family.

  10. Peter, married Ann Mac Donald from Trotternish, with issue, one
        daughter. Married secondly Margaret Morrison, by whom he had
        three daughters.

  11. John, died unmarried, but left an illegitimate son named John, who
        married a daughter of Neil Mac Sween, mason, Roag.

  12. Euphemia, married Malcolm Nicholson, with issue—(_a_) Hector, died
        without issue; (_b_) John, married with issue; (_c_) Murdo, who
        married a daughter of James Wood; (_d_) John, married Janet,
        daughter of John _Bàn_ Mac Leod, Lusta, with issue; (_e_)
        Donald, married a Mac Nab, with issue; (_f_) Catherine,
        unmarried; (_g_) Ann, married Murdo Mac Innes, Roag, without
        issue; (_h_) Marion, married Norman Mac Askill, tenant,
        Ullinish, with issue; (_i_) Effie, married Samuel Thorburn,
        Holmisdale, with issue.

According to this genealogy, which however does not profess to be
complete, the line of hereditary Mac Crimmon pipers was very short
indeed, consisting of only _Iain Odhar_, Malcolm, John, and John
(_Dubh_). That this is not the complete line is undoubted, for we have
historical proof that there were other Mac Crimmons pipers to Mac Leod.
As a matter of fact, one of the family living in Alexandria,
Dumbartonshire, as late as 1898, writes as follows:—

  “My uncle, Donald Mac Crimmon, was the last piper of the Mac Crimmons
  that was in the Castle, and he died over fifty years ago. My father
  also, Norman Mac Crimmon, was a pibroch player, and was taught by
  Captain Mac Leod of Gesto, who is now dead fifty-four years. Both were
  born at Lowerkill, Glendale. My great grandfather, Donald Donn, was
  brother to Donald _Bàn_, who composed ‘Mac Crimmon’s Lament,’ and was
  with the Mac Leod Highlanders near Moy Hall, the residence of Lady Mac
  Intosh, reconnoitering Prince Charlie.”

Some stories—they are only stories—assert that the Mac Crimmons were
originally Mac Gregors. The Mac Gregors, it is pointed out, had an
academy for the teaching of pipe music in Lochaber many centuries ago,
and the Mac Gregor music, such as the “Reel of Tulloch” (that this is a
Mac Gregor tune is a matter of debate, however) is the merriest and also
the saddest in the Highlands. Rob Roy’s deathbed tune is said to have
simply been “We Return no More,” in other words, “Mac Crimmon’s Lament,”
and his piper was himself a Mac Crimmon, who, under the mournful
circumstances, recalled the traditional strain. There is certainly a
great deal that is probable in this, but that is the most that can be
said about it.

The best, and what, on the face of it, is the most reliable story of the
Mac Crimmons is that given by Angus Mac Kay in his book of pipe
music.[14] It is beyond doubt that high musical talent as well as high
moral principle and personal bravery descended from father to son during
many generations in the family of the Mac Crimmons. They became so
famous that pupils were sent to them from many parts of the Highlands,
and one of the best certificates a piper could possess was his having
studied under the Mac Crimmons. Finding the number of their pupils
increasing daily, they at length opened a regular school or college on
the farm of Boreraig, about eight miles south-west of Dunvegan Castle,
but separated from it by Loch Follart. Here seven years’ study was
prescribed for each scholar, regular lessons were given out, and certain
periods were fixed on for receiving instruction. The tuition was carried
on as systematically as in any of our northern schools, and the names of
some of the caves and knolls in the vicinity still indicate the places
where the scholars used to practise respectively the chanter, the small
pipe and the large bagpipe, before playing in the presence of the
master. This school was not entirely extinct in 1779, for Dr. Johnson,
who was at Dunvegan in that year, alludes to it and says his dinner “was
exhilarated by the bagpipes at Armadale and Dunvegan.” The school proper
was the “ben” end of the dwelling-house, which seems to have been about
seventy feet in length and two storeys in height. In actual practice,
however, the room was little used. The “professors” preferred the open
hillside, a small hollow near the house, or a cave in the neighbourhood,
which came to be known as the Pipers’ Cave. Near the Pipers’ Cave is
another known as the Pigeons’ Cave, which is about a mile in length. To
it, tradition asserts, the daughters of the Mac Crimmons were wont to
slip with a favourite set of pipes, for they too were musically
inclined, and so proficient did some of them become, an ancient
chronicler tells us, that they were able to superintend the class work
in the absence of their fathers.

Footnote 14:

  See page 109.

The speciality of the Mac Crimmons was the pibroch, and many students
studied with them for years so as to become proficient in this one
branch of pipe music—a branch which is, in the estimation of most
pipers, far superior to reels and strathspeys. They held the farm of
Boreraig rent free until the time came when all the hereditary pipers
were either dispossessed of their lands or asked to pay rent for them.
The proud Mac Crimmons declined to pay rent, broke up the college, and
from that day ceased to exist as a family for the cultivation of pipe
music. Their farm was afterwards let to eighteen different tenants, and
drew over £100 a year in rent, so they must have been treated with
considerable liberality by their chiefs.

No tradition exists, says Mac Kay, relating to the time when the Mac
Crimmons became professional pipers to the Mac Leods, but neither is
their trace of any others holding the office. The first of whom there is
any account is _Iain Odhar_ or Dun-coloured John, who lived about 1600,
but it is evident from their compositions that the family must have been
established long before that date. They were a minor sept, and they are
supposed to have derived their name from the fact that the first
performer studied at Cremona. After _Iain Odhar_ came his son, _Donull
Mór_ or Big Donald, who became a great pibroch player, and getting into
the good graces of Mac Leod, got special opportunities for learning. He
was sent to a college in Ireland, which is said to have been started
there by a celebrated Scottish piper, and he learned all there was to
learn.

The system of this Irish school permitted one pupil only to be in the
presence of the master at a time, but _Donull Mor_, in his anxiety to
learn, hid himself in a corner, where he could hear all the other
students—there were twenty-four—at their lessons. He required only to
hear a tune once to remember it completely, so he very soon exhausted
the repertory of the master. When he came back to Skye, Mac Leod was
delighted with the progress he had made. But the piper was not destined
to remain at peace long. He had a brother who, because of a squint in
one of his eyes, was known as _Padruig Coag_, or Squinting Peter, and
this brother quarrelled with a foster brother of his own, a native of
Kintail, who afterwards treacherously killed him. Big Donald swore
vengeance, and going up to his chief’s room threw his pipes on the bed.
Mac Leod asking what was wrong, Donald told his story, and demanded that
his chief should avenge his clansman. Mac Leod promised to see justice
done within a year, and Donald took his leave. The chief, however, had
no intention of executing vengeance on the Kintail man; he only wished
to give Donald’s anger time to cool. But he did not know his man, for at
the end of the year Donald, without giving a hint to anyone, set out in
pursuit of his brother’s murderer. He found that he was in Kintail, but
in hiding, and as the people of the village declined to give him up, the
wrath of Donald _Mór_ Mac Crimmon broke all bounds. He set fire to
eighteen of their houses, a trick which cost several lives. It was then
his turn to go into hiding, which he did in Lord Reays country. The Lord
of Kintail offered a big reward for his arrest, but he was not caught,
though he was known to be wandering among the hills. His principal place
of concealment was in a shepherd’s house, where a bed was specially made
for him in the wall. At last Kintail came to know of this haunt of Mac
Crimmon’s, and sent his son with a dozen men to seize him. Donald _Mór_
was in the house when the shepherd’s wife saw the party coming, and he
betook himself to bed. The woman then made a big fire in the centre of
the floor, where fires were always made in those days, and when the
avenger of blood came with his men she welcomed them effusively, and,
making them sit round the fire, she hung their plaids on a rope between
them and Mac Crimmon’s bed. Then the fugitive slipped out behind and was
free, profiting as other and more notable men have done by a woman’s
astuteness. When the pursuers had searched the house and found nothing,
the shepherd’s wife entertained them hospitably and kept them for the
night. When they had gone to rest Mac Crimmon came in and, gathering all
their arms while they slept soundly, he placed the weapons all over
their leader and retired. When morning broke, Mac Kenzie of Kintail
immediately realized what had taken place, and was astonished at the
generosity of Big Donald. “If Donald _Mór_ Mac Crimmon is alive,” he
said, “it was he that did this, and it was as easy for him to take my
life as to do so.” When they went outside they saw Mac Crimmon on the
other side of a stream, and when his men essayed to ford the stream and
seize him, Mac Kenzie threatened to shoot the first who touched the
piper, and swore to Mac Crimmon that if he would cross the river he
would not be injured. After all the men had been sworn to the same
purpose, Mac Crimmon did cross, and in consideration of his nobility in
sparing his life during the night, Mac Kenzie took the piper home with
him, and by dint of special pleading managed to obtain for him the
forgiveness of Lord Kintail. Then Donald _Mór_ returned to his
allegiance at Dunvegan, where he remained ever after—a great piper. It
was after his day that the Mac Crimmons were universally acknowledged to
be the best pipers in Scotland, so much so that no piper was considered
perfect unless he had studied for some time under them.

Donald _Mór_ Mac Crimmon was succeeded by his son Patrick _Mór_. This
Patrick had eight sons, seven of whom died within twelve months. On this
great bereavement he composed a tune called _Cumha no Cloinne_, or “The
Lament for the Children.” In 1745 Mac Leod’s piper was Donald _Bàn_ Mac
Crimmon, the composer of “Mac Crimmon’s Lament.” Mac Leod was opposed to
Prince Charlie, and when he was defeated at Inverurie by Lord Louis
Gordon, Donald _Bàn_ was taken prisoner. On this occasion a striking
mark of respect was paid to Mac Crimmon by his brother pipers in Lord
Louis Gordon’s following. The morning after the battle they did not play
as usual, and on inquiry it was found that they were silent because Mac
Crimmon was a prisoner. He was immediately set at liberty, but was
killed shortly after at “The Rout of Moy,” a rather tragic incident in
Highland Jacobite History. It was before leaving on the expedition in
which he met his death that Donald _Bàn_ composed “Mac Crimmon’s
Lament,” under the presentiment that he would never see Dunvegan again.
On the night of the Rout of Moy, it was said, a second-sight man saw the
body of Mac Crimmon shrunken to the proportions of a child, a sure sign
of impending death. Donald _Bàn_ was said to excel most of his race by
the beauty and neatness with which he noted on paper the tunes he played
and composed.

[Illustration:

  A MAC ARTHUR PIPER
]

How the race became extinct—if it is extinct—cannot be determined. John
_Dubh_ Mac Crimmon was the last who held the hereditary office, and of
him it is related that about 1795 he determined, probably because of the
changed circumstances, to emigrate to America, that he actually went as
far as Greenock, but that there his love for the misty island became too
much for him, and he went back to Skye. But he was not then piper to Mac
Leod, and he spent the rest of his life in retirement. When he became
too infirm to play the pipes, he would sit outside and run over the
notes on his walking stick. He lived to the age of 91, dying in 1822,
and was buried with his fathers in the kirkyard at Durinish. _Music of
the Highland Clans_, written in 1862, states that the last of this noble
race of minstrels was a blind and venerable old gentleman then living at
Gourock; but Logan’s _Scottish Gael_, written in 1831, says a Captain
Mac Crimmon “died lately in Kent at an advanced age, and the descendant
of these celebrated pipers is now a respectable farmer in Kent.” The
author of _Musical Memoirs of Scotland_ (1849) says the Mac Crimmons
ended in a woman then keeping school in Skye, who could go through all
the intricacies of the pibroch on the family instrument. There is said
to have been a piper of the name in Glasgow about 1872, who claimed to
be a direct descendant of the Mac Crimmons. He was an old man then, and
all trace of him is now lost. If he is dead, which is highly probable,
it is almost certain, that although the race as dimmed. So Mac Crimmon
generally found some excuse for sending Mac Arthur away to some distance
when he wished to play these tunes. One day his master had a visitor who
desired to hear one of the highly-prized melodies, and in order to get
the boy Mac Arthur out of the way Mac Crimmon sent him a message to a
neighbouring township some miles distant. But the boy, suspecting the
plot, lingered about the door until he heard the tunes, and then rushed
off on his message. Afterwards in a secluded spot he practised the airs
until he became perfect. But Mac Crimmon one day suddenly heard a tune
which he thought he alone could play, and angrily approaching the
performer, whom he found to be his pupil, he said:—“You young rascal,
where have you picked up that piece of music?” “I picked it up in the
back door that day you entertained your friend to it,” said Mac Arthur,
assuming the utmost indifference; “and,” he continued, “I shall lose no
more time than the boat shall take on her voyage to Mull in telling my
master that you are not giving me the full benefit of your talents, for
which you were amply paid by my benefactor.” Old Mac Crimmon felt
somewhat alarmed at the cool indifference with which his pupil addressed
him, and, knowing what would result from the matter being made known to
his influential patron, he very discreetly confessed his guilt, and
promised his clever pupil better attention in the future. Pupil and
tutor seem to have got on very well after this incident, and when, in
the course of a year or two, Mac Arthur quitted the Mac Crimmon College,
he was ranked among the foremost pipers of his day.

Mac Donald granted the Mac Arthurs a perpetual gift of the farm of
Peingowen, near the castle of Duntulm. Like the Mac Crimmons, they kept
a “college.” Their establishment, which was at Ulva near Mull, was
divided into four apartments, one for their own use, one for receiving
strangers, one for the cattle, and one for the use of the students while
practising. Charles Mac Arthur, the best known of the race, received his
education from Patrick _Og_ Mac Crimmon, staying at Dunvegan Castle for
this purpose for eleven years. He taught a nephew, who afterwards
settled in Edinburgh, became piper to the Highland Society of Scotland,
and was known in the capital as “Professor” Mac Arthur. At a competition
in 1783, he performed, we are told, “with great approbation,” receiving
a splendid set of pipes specially made for him, and a number of the then
leading pipers subscribed to a testimonial to his merits. It was also
agreed to support a plan of his for a college to instruct those whose
services might be useful in Highland regiments, but of this nothing more
was heard. The last of the Mac Donalds’ hereditary pipers was another
nephew of the great Charles Mac Arthur, who died in London. He was piper
to the Highland Society of London, and composed many pieces of
considerable merit. Like the Mac Crimmons, the Mac Arthurs noted their
music by a system of their own, and they made large collections of
pibrochs.

The Archibald Mac Arthur, of whom a sketch is given on another page, was
a native of Mull, and was acknowledged to be well skilled in bagpipe
music, having been taught by a Mac Crimmon. In 1810, the date of the
print, he entered for the annual competition at Edinburgh, but failing
to carry off the first prize, he refused to accept the second, thereby
debarring himself from again appearing on a similar occasion. When the
King visited Edinburgh in 1822, this Mac Arthur followed in the train of
his chief, from whom he held a cottage with a small portion of land.
That part of the island of Staffa on which this croft was situated was
sold, but Mac Arthur, though no longer employed in his former capacity,
was allowed by the new proprietor to remain in his old home. Angus Mac
Kay, it should be added, tells of a John Mac Arthur, who, in 1806,
obtained second place in the Edinburgh competition, but declined to
accept the prize. Probably there was but one such incident although name
and date are mistaken in one case or the other.


                            THE MAC INTYRES

were hereditary pipers to Menzies of Menzies. The Menzies’ lived in
Rannoch, and the first Mac Intyre of whom we hear was Donald _Mór_, who
is said to have returned from the Isles about 1638, having apparently
been at Skye receiving the finishing touches to his musical education.
His son, John Mac Intyre also studied at Dunvegan. Donald _Bàn_, his
son, succeeded him as piper to the chief, Sir Robert the Menzies, third
Bart. When he died his son Robert, who should have succeeded him, was
piper to the chief of Clan Ranald, and although, being the eldest son,
he inherited the pipes which, according to tradition, were played at
Bannockburn, he did not take up his father’s office. Ultimately he went
to America, leaving the old pipes with the Mac Donalds of Loch Moidart.
John Mac Intyre, his only brother, lived in the Menzies country, but
cannot have been a piper, for he does not seem to have filled the office
either. He died about 1834, and men of other names were afterwards
pipers to the Menzies. Descendants of the Mac Intyres were living near
Loch Rannoch about the middle of the last century, and some are probably
there to this day.


                              THE MAC KAYS

were pipers to the Mac Kenzies of Gairloch, and one of them at least was
accounted second only to the Mac Crimmons. The family came originally
from Sutherlandshire, and began with Rorie, or _Ruaraidh_ Mac Kay, who
about 1592 found it advisable to leave his native place. As a boy he was
appointed piper to the laird of Mac Kay, and on one occasion he
accompanied his master to Meikle Ferry with John Roy Mac Kenzie of
Gairloch, who had been on a visit to the Mac Kay Country. At the ferry
the servant of another gentleman, who was also about to cross, tried to
retain the boat, and Mac Kay, then a lad of seventeen, in hot-headedness
drew his dirk and cut off the servant’s hand. Thereupon his master said
he could not keep him in his employment. Mac Kenzie at once gave the
piper an invitation to come with him, and the matter was arranged on the
spot. Rorie ever after was a Gairloch man, but beyond the story of how
he came to the district, little of his personal history is known. In his
duties as piper he was frequently assisted by his brother, Donald _Mòr_
Mac Kay, who, however, returned to the Reay Country before his death.
Rorie was piper in succession to four chiefs of Gairloch. He died in
1689 at an extreme old age, leaving one son. Him he sent to Dunvegan to
be trained by Patrick _Og_ Mac Crimmon, and when he left, after seven
years’ study, it was acknowledged that he had no equal except his
master. This piper, _Am Piobaire Dall_, _Iain Dall_, or, in plain
English, John Mac Kay, was the most famous of the Gairloch pipers. He
was an enthusiast in his profession, and composed twenty-four pibrochs,
besides a number of strathspeys and reels. He was well read, though
blind, and knew the histories of Ireland, France, Greece, and
Scandinavia, while none excelled him in knowledge of Ossianic poetry and
legendary lore. When he became advanced in years he was superannuated,
and passed his time in making excursions into the Reay country and Skye,
visiting at gentlemen’s houses, to which he was always welcome. He died
in 1854, at the age of ninety-eight, and was succeeded by his son Angus,
who in his turn was succeeded by his son John Mac Kay. The four members
of the family were pipers in succession to eight chiefs of Kintail, the
succession in each case being from father to son. The Mac Kays, as has
been said, came originally from the Reay Country, the home of all the
Mac Kays, where there seems to have been a college similar to that kept
at Dunvegan by the Mac Crimmons; at any rate, a peculiarly large number
of Mac Kay pipers came from the district, just as if they had been
trained in a school.

The changing times were too much for the Mac Kays, as for the other
pipers, and in 1805 the representative of the family, the John Mac Kay
last mentioned, went to America. He died in Pictou in 1835, when over
eighty years of age. The late Mr. Alexander Mac Kenzie, editor of the
_Celtic_ Magazine, on a tour through the States in 1880, met one of the
family. “More interesting to me,” he wrote, “than all my other
discoveries on this continent was finding a representative of the famous
pipers and poets of Gairloch in the person of John Mac Kay, who occupies
the most honourable and prominent position in this thriving town (New
Glasgow), that of stipendiary magistrate. His great-grandfather was the
celebrated blind piper of Gairloch.” Afterwards Mr. Mac Kenzie tells of
the circumstances of the family in America. They had, he says, ceased to
be pipers, and no one of the race kept up the traditions of their
fathers in the strange land.


                              THE RANKINS

—called in Gaelic _Clann Raing_—were anciently called _Clann Duille_,
being descended from one of the progenitors of the Clan Mac Lean called
_Cudulligh_, or _Cu-duille_. They were pipers to the Mac Leans of Duart,
the High Chief of the Clan, and became pipers to the Mac Leans of Coll
after the Duarts lost their lands, when Sir John Mac Lean was chief in
the beginning of the eighteenth century. They were hereditary pipers
from time immemorial, and the most noteworthy incident associated with
them of which we have any authentic record occurred when the great Dr.
Johnson visited their island. The piper who played every day while
dinner was being served attracted the doctor’s attention, and he
expressed admiration of his picturesque dress and martial air, and
observed that “he brought no disgrace on the family of Rankin.” We have
few dates connected with the Rankins, but we have on record a letter
from a John Mac Lean, on the garrison staff of Fort-William, Bengal,
written in January, 1799, which states that thirty years before “Hector
Mac Laine was piper to John Mac Lain of Lochbuoy, and was allowed to be
the first in Scotland.” This “Mac Laine” was probably a Rankin. Like so
many of the others, America provided them, too, with an ultimate home,
the last hereditary Rankin emigrating to Prince Edward Island.


                             THE CAMPBELLS

were pipers to the Campbells of Mochaster, in Argyllshire, and they,
too, were indebted to Patrick _Og_ Mac Crimmon for a good deal of their
training. The latest record of them in their official capacity is to be
found on a tombstone, in Bellside Churchyard, Lanarkshire, erected by
Walter Frederick Campbell of Isla and Shawfield, an M.P. in the year of
grace 1831, over his piper, John Campbell.

Besides those mentioned, there were famous, if not actually hereditary,
pipers in different parts of the Highlands. A branch of the Mac Gregors
established a school in Rannoch, and, the Mac Phersons of Cluny and
nearly all the other Highland chiefs of any note had excellent pipers,
many of whom produced pieces of considerable merit. But the hereditary
pipers have all passed away long ago, with the passing of that phase of
life which was necessary to their existence. Their names, however, are
still names to conjure with, and are likely to be so long as a love for
their music remains a prominent trait of Highland character.




                              CHAPTER XIX.
                        SOME LATTER DAY PIPERS.

                  “Ours the strains renowned in story,
                  Of peaceful hall or deadly corrie,
                  Would you call to field or foray,
                  Melt to love or rouse to glory?
                          Sound our mountain melody.”

  Angus Mac Kay—Queen Victoria’s first piper—His book—Donald Mac Kay—
    John Bane Mac Kenzie—The Queen’s offer—The piper’s reply—Donald
    Cameron—His achievements—His theory of pipe music—His system of
    noting—His last competition—A special reed—“The King of Pipers”—
    Other latter day pipers.


After the death of the last Mac Crimmon piper in 1822 no one was left to
maintain the traditions of the hereditary pipers. But the class was not
wholly extinct. The next notable name we come across is one that is not
likely to be soon forgotten by those interested in Highland music. There
is no name better known to the world of pipers than that of Angus Mac
Kay, the compiler of the first really serviceable book of pipe music,
but, curiously enough, very little is known of his life. He belonged to
a well-known family of pipers, and was connected with the famous Mac
Kays of Gairloch. The family home was at Kyleakin, the pretty Skye
village opposite the Kyle terminus of the Highland Railway. His father,
John Mac Kay, was piper to Mac Leod of Raasay, who sent him to Boreraig,
Dunvegan, to be instructed by John _Dubh_ Mac Crimmon. He was afterwards
piper to Lord Willoughby de Eresby in Perthshire, and finally settled in
Kyleakin, where he trained some of the best-known pipers, including John
Bane Mac Kenzie.

[Illustration:

  ANGUS MAC KAY: FIRST PIPER TO QUEEN VICTORIA

  (_From a drawing in the possession of Duncan Munro, Kyleakin, Skye_)
]

Angus was born in Kyleakin about 1813, and was instructed by his father.
He was piper to Davidson of Tulloch and also to Campbell of Islay.
Afterwards he entered the service of Queen Victoria, in which he
remained for many years. He was, by the way, Her Majesty’s first piper.
He devoted a great deal of his time to collecting and noting the leading
pipe tunes, and in 1838 he published his collection as a book. This was,
and still is, a unique work, being the first systematic collection. Mac
Donald’s, which came before it, was crude and could hardly be played
from except by expert performers, but Mac Kay’s book, which consists of
sixty pibrochs, although it contains various errors, is to this day
considered by many competent judges the best of its kind ever written.
It is the author’s lasting monument, and although comparatively little
is known of his life, it cannot fail to keep his name in remembrance
long after the names of those who were pipers only are forgotten. Mac
Kay was a tall, gentlemanly-looking man, with a taste for literature. He
died at Dumfries on 21st March, 1859, under sad circumstances. His mind
had given way, and when out walking near the Nith, he somehow got into
the river, and was drowned before those with whom he resided were aware
that he was out of their charge. His nephew, Donald Mac Kay, who was
trained at Maryburgh, Ross-shire, by Donald Cameron, became piper to
H.R.H. the Prince of Wales, now King Edward VII., and his wife was for a
long time in the Royal service at Sandringham.

John Mac Kenzie, familiarly known as John Bane Mac Kenzie, or _Am
Piobaire Bàn_, was born near Dingwall about the end of the seventeenth
century, and died in 1864, full of years, and with as high honours as
piper could expect to get. His first situation as piper was with Mr. Mac
Kenzie of Allangrange, about 1820. The following year he entered the
service of Mr. Davidson of Tulloch, where he remained for twelve or
thirteen years. While at Tulloch John was often taken by his master to
Applecross, where a friend of his, a Captain Mac Kenzie, resided. One of
Captain Mac Kenzie’s daughters fell in love with the handsome piper, and
one night they ran away and got married at Crieff. Shortly afterwards
John was appointed piper to the then Marquis of Breadalbane, in whose
service he remained for thirty years, when ill-health forced him to
retire. He spent the evening of his days in a fine cottage which he
bought in the village of Munlochy, Ross-shire, and died in 1864, deeply
regretted by all who knew him. He was buried at Strathpeffer, where a
fine headstone was erected by his wife, to mark his grave.

John Bane Mac Kenzie was the foremost player of his time, and as an all
round exponent of the national instrument it is doubtful if he ever had
an equal. In appearance he was the finest possible specimen of a
Highlander, of tall, handsome physique, upright in appearance as in
character. When in full uniform his tunic was covered with medals and
decorations won at competitions, including the gold medal of the
Highland Society of London, which he won in 1838, when it was first
offered. His knowledge of English was limited, but what he lacked in
English he made up in the quaintly humorous nature of his replies and
his good knowledge of his native tongue. He composed a number of tunes,
the best known of which is “Mac Kenzie’s Farewell to Sutherland.” Her
late Majesty Queen Victoria having seen John, asked his master if his
piper would enter her service. The story of how he declined the Queen’s
offer is worth telling. When she communicated to Breadalbane her desire
to have _Am Piobaire Bàn_ as a member of the Royal household, the chief
felt taken aback, but not wishing to offend Her Majesty, he approached
John on the matter:—

[Illustration:

  JOHN BANE MAC KENZIE

  (_From a Photograph in the possession of Pipe-Major Ronald Mac Kenzie,
    Gordon Castle_)
]

  “‘John,’ he said, ‘the Queen wants a piper.’

  “‘Yes, ma Lort.’

  “‘He must be thoroughly first-rate at marches, and also at strathspeys
  and reels, just the same as you are yourself, John.’

  “‘Yes, my Lort.’

  “‘The Queen also wishes her piper to be a fine specimen of a
  Highlander, tall and handsome, with a fine face and figure; in fact,
  one something like yourself, John.’

  “‘Yes, my Lort.’

  “‘There is one other indispensable qualification. He must be sober,
  reliable, and in every way a respectable man, just like yourself,
  John.’

  “‘Yes, my Lort.’

  “‘Well, I have now told you all that is required in the man wanted by
  the Queen. He must be in all respects like yourself, both as man and
  as piper. Can you recommend any?’

  “‘Inteet, ma Lort, there’s no sich a man to be found in aal Scotland.’

  “‘And will you go yourself, John?’

  “‘Na, na, my Lort, na, na.’”

This finished the conversation, and John remained with Breadalbane. This
story, it may be noted, bears a striking resemblance to one told of the
Prince of Wales’s piper in a previous chapter.[15]

Footnote 15:

  See page 164.

Queen Victoria seems to have coveted the best of the Highland pipers,
but while no one doubted their loyalty, they did not always agree to
serve Her Majesty. Not only did John Bane Mac Kenzie prefer the service
of his chief to that of his Queen, but Donald Cameron, a pupil of his,
and the piper who, more than any other, was acknowledged to be the true
successor of the Mac Crimmons, declined a similar offer, and remained
with his Highland master.

Eleven years before the last Mac Crimmon piper died, Donald Cameron was
born at “the burn of the music,” in Strath-Conan, Ross-shire, and at
eight years of age he was playing the pipes. The late Mr. Mac Kenzie of
Millbank, an influential Highland gentleman in the district, took a
great interest in the youthful musician, and put him under the tuition
of Big Donald Mac Lennan, of Moy, father of the well-known John Mac
Lennan, piper to the late Earl of Fife. Cameron was next taught by Angus
Mac Kay, whose father, John Mac Kay was taught by John _Dubh_ Mac
Crimmon. His last tutor was John Bane Mac Kenzie. He first competed in
Edinburgh in 1838, at seventeen years of age, and won second prize, a
claymore marked “Andria Varara,” which afterwards came into the
possession of the late Major A. C. Mac Kenzie, Maryburgh, Ross-shire.

[Illustration:

  DONALD CAMERON

  (_From a Photograph in the possession of Pipe-Major Mac Dougall
    Gillies, Glasgow_)
]

The prizes won by Cameron during his career as a professional piper were
not very numerous, but they were all high, and he soon became ineligible
through having won all the possible firsts. In his early days there was
generally a rehearsal of intending competitors, and only the best were
allowed to compete in public, with the result that the very permission
to compete was considered an honour, and the winning of a prize a
distinguished honour. Cameron won at Perth, in 1850, a large silver
challenge medal presented by his employer, the late Colonel Keith W.
Stewart Mac Kenzie of Seaforth; and he won the Highland Society of
London’s challenge gold medal in Inverness in 1859, a feat which was
subsequently performed by his sons, Colin and Alexander; and also six
sets of pipes at different meetings. His first service as piper was with
Mr. Robert Morison, Scallisaig, Glenelg. Afterwards he was employed by
Sir James J. R. Mac Kenzie, Bart., of Scatwell and Rosehaugh, but his
principal service was with Colonel Mac Kenzie of Seaforth, with whom he
continued till his death at Maryburgh in January, 1868. When the Brahan
Company of Volunteers was formed by Seaforth in 1866, Cameron was
appointed honorary piper, and when he died a detachment accompanied his
remains to the burying-ground of the High Church, Inverness.

In 1863, Seaforth presented his piper with the title deeds of one of the
best houses in the village of Maryburgh, thus following to a certain
extent the practice of the chiefs when the piper was a part of the
household. Ten years previously he was selected to be piper to Her
Majesty Queen Victoria, an honour which he highly appreciated, but so
strong was his attachment to Seaforth that he preferred to remain with
him. Donald Cameron was very like the Mac Crimmons. He lived in
different times, but had he lived when they lived he would have been as
one of them. In his theory of pipe music the sounds formed a continuous
and harmonious whole, as distinguished from that of one or two other
well-known pipers, whose playing, even of pibrochs, was marked by its
jerkiness. He was practically an illiterate man, but, besides being able
to read ordinary music, he noted his tunes in a special manner, on the
lines of the _Canntaireachd_ of the Mac Crimmons or the Mac Arthurs.
Each of these systems of notation was different from the others, and the
invention of the piper who originally used it, so if Cameron was
illiterate he was certainly also clever. He was a shrewd old man, with a
fund of stories connected with the Highlands and leading Highland
families. He was a keen angler and a great favourite with Seaforth.
When, at a comparatively early age, he had ceased playing at
competitions, he determined once more to try his skill in public. So he
took advantage of the Northern Meeting, Inverness, where a competition
was to be held for former gold medalists only. This competition was the
first of its kind, and all the best men were there. When Donald Cameron
began to play a great hush fell on the crowd, and he played to an
audience that scarcely breathed. He was, of course, placed first. On
that matter there was no room for dispute. The photograph here
reproduced was taken immediately after that competition.

When Cameron was playing in the year 1859 for the Highland Society of
London’s gold medal at Inverness, he had rather an awkward experience.
The tune was “Mac Intosh’s Lament,” and he had not got much more than
through the ground or _urlar_ when the drones began to slip off his
shoulder. He made several futile attempts to adjust them, but down they
would come, and down they did come, until they rested on his arm. But
this made no difference whatever to the rendering of the tune. He played
just as if the instrument was on his shoulder in the ordinary way. An
onlooker remarked to Alexander Mac Lennan how splendidly he played,
although under a disadvantage. “Sandy” replied that “it made no
difference to Donald although he held the bag between his knees.”

In personal appearance, as the sketch shows, he was the ideal successor
of the hereditary pipers. In 1862 he won a prize of £10 offered by the
Club of True Highlanders for the best rendering of pibrochs, and the
chronicler of the event refers to him as being “with his grand, massive
face and ample grey beard, the very impersonation of an old Highland
piper.” His favourite music was pibroch, but he was an all-round master
of the pipes. Like many old players, he made all his own reeds, and was
very particular about them. He had one special reed, which he used only
on high occasions, such as a guest night at Brahan Castle. He kept it,
when not in use, in an air-tight bottle, and one day a tinker piper
called at his house, and, as usual with the class, begged for a reed.
Mrs. Cameron thoughtlessly gave him this old-looking reed out of the
bottle, and when Donald came home some time after, and was told what had
been done, he was sorely put about. Cameron was one of that small number
of men who could keep up a continuous sound when playing the practice
chanter, a thing very few players can do. He was the composer of some
first-class tunes, including “Kessock Ferry,” “Brahan Castle,” and “Lady
Anne Mac Kenzie’s Farewell to Rosehaugh.” Of his four sons, three became
pipers. Colin, piper to the Duke of Fife, is well known as a teacher of
pipe music; Alexander was piper to the Marquis of Huntly; and Keith
Cameron, now dead, was piper to the Highland Light Infantry. They all
made names for themselves in the musical world, but in no case is their
personality so outstanding as that of their father. Although the mantle
of the Mac Crimmons seemed to fall on him, the changing circumstances of
life made it impossible for him to pass it on to another generation, and
to find the true representative of the old pipers in the pipers of to-
day would task the ingenuity of those best acquainted with the
accomplishments of the different men.

John Bane Mac Kenzie and Donald Cameron were the only players who held
the title, “King of Pipers.” This was played for at the Northern
Meeting, Inverness, and was the prize given at a competition between
champions, the winner being known as the “champion of champions” or
“King of Pipers.” After Donald Cameron’s day, when he won the prize and
the title, the competition lapsed, and though there are now many so-
called “champions,” there is no “King of Pipers.”

Among other latter-day pipers it is almost impossible to pick and
choose. There was Donald Mac Phee, a miner lad from Coatbridge, who
became pipe-maker, teacher, composer of and writer about pipe music, and
died in Glasgow in 1880; William Ross, piper to the Black Watch, and
later to Queen Victoria, who compiled a book containing forty pibrochs,
and 437 strathspeys, marches, and reels; Donald Mac Phedran, a first-
class Glasgow player who had one of the largest known collections of
manuscript tunes; Alexander Cameron, a brother of Donald Cameron, who
won all the champion gold medals, and was looked on as the Mac Crimmon
of his day; Duncan Mac Eachern, an apparently clumsy manipulator of the
pipes, but an able player; Donald Galbraith, a native of Islay;
Alexander Mac Donald, late piper to the Duke of Fife; the Mac Lennans,
especially William Mac Lennan, who as a piper and dancer occupied a
unique position; Alexander Mac Donald, Glentruim, a splendid pibroch
player, who died a few years ago at Aberlour; Malcolm Mac Pherson,
Cluny’s piper, and a well-known pibroch player; John Mac Rae, known as
_Piobaire Beag_, who was piper to Francis, Lord Seaforth, and John Bane
Mac Kenzie’s first tutor; Duncan Campbell, piper to Sir Charles Forbes,
Castle Newe, Strathdon, a piper who on arriving at a competition always
asked if Donald Cameron was there, as “he did not care for anyone else;”
Pipe-Major Alexander Mac Lennan, of the Inverness Militia; John Mac
Lauchlan, a first-rate player of the “little” music; and many others who
deserve to be written about. In our own day we have Colin Cameron, son
of Donald, piper to the Duke of Fife and recognised as not only one of
the best living pipers, but a man who takes more than a passing interest
in the literature of his art and of the Highlands generally; William
Sutherland, Airdrie, now retired, a man who had not his equal at jigs,
was very successful as an all-round player, and composed numerous tunes;
Pipe-Major Mac Dougal Gillies, of the 1st H.L.I., a pupil of Alexander
Cameron, son of Seaforth’s famous piper, and himself one of the best
known and most successful of living players; John Mac Coll of Oban, a
pupil of Mac Phee’s and holder of most of the highest possible honours;
Ronald Mac Kenzie, late of the 78th Highlanders and now piper to the
Duke of Richmond and Gordon; Angus Mac Rae of Callander; Farquhar Mac
Rae of Glasgow, and other leading pipers whose success and popularity
deserve notice. But to do justice to the subject would require a large
amount of space and it would also necessitate comparisons between the
abilities of lately deceased and still living men, which the present
writer is not at all inclined to make. The task of general biographer
would no doubt be pleasant, and there are materials enough in existence
to justify anyone in believing that the result would be well worthy of
the effort, but this is hardly the place for it. It is enough for us, at
present, to know that we still have men fully capable of keeping pipe
music up to the high standard set by its old time exponents and that, if
we have few who, like Saul of old, are head and shoulders above the
crowd, the stature of the crowd itself is of a high average. Perhaps
that very fact will make the task of the biographer all the more
difficult.

[Illustration]

[Illustration:

  BAND OF THE SUTHERLAND RIFLES—THE LARGEST VOLUNTEER PIPE BAND IN THE
    WORLD
]




                              CHAPTER XX.
                        HOW PIPING IS PRESERVED.

       “O, wake once more! how rude soe’er the hand
         That ventures o’er thy magic maze to stray,
       O, wake once more! though scarce my skill command,
         Some feeble echoing of thine earlier lay;
       Though harsh and faint and soon to die away,
         And all unworthy of the nobler strain;
       Yet if one heart throb higher at its sway,
         The wizard note has not been touched in vain.
       Then silent be no more! Enchantress, wake again!”
                                                       —_Scott._

  The waking—Professor Blackie—Highland Society of Scotland—Highland
    Society of London—The system of competitions—The first competition—
    The venue changed—The gold medal—Present day competitions—Some
    suggestions—R.L.S.—Pipe bands—Examples from high life—Quality of
    music—The Pipes abroad—Sir Walter Scott.


The verse of Scott’s, quoted at the head of this chapter, referred to
the harp, but we may use it as referring to the pipes, remembering at
the same time that there is little hope of these ever occupying the
position they once occupied. The waking must be to another life
altogether. Civilisation ousted the pipes from the position of clan and
war instrument of a native population, but it did not find them another.
“Had the governing powers been anxious,” says Professor Blackie, “to do
common educational justice to the sons of the brave fellows who so
freely shed their blood in our defence, the last thing they would have
suffered to be neglected in the Highland schools was the national music.
For national purposes the “March of the Cameron Men,” and scores of such
heroic lays in the true old Greek style, were worth all the Latin
grammars that ever were printed. But an evil destiny hung over this
noble foundation of national inspiration; a blight fell with deadening
swoop over the brightness and the joy and the luxuriance of Highland
life.” Professor Blackie himself did more than any other man to remove
this blight, and to him in great measure is due the credit for the
present revival of respect for Highland literature and Highland music.
Other men of letters have, by writing of the Highlands, shown that the
country has a past worth the attention of the romancist, and Scott,
Stevenson, William Black, Fiona Mac Leod, and Neil Munro have brought
Highland life into touch with the rest of the world better than
centuries of ordinary “civilisation” could have done. But Professor
Blackie was the champion enthusiast, though even he realised that if the
harp of the Gael was to wake it must wake to new conditions, and be
prepared to live in a world it knew not, and which, to a great extent,
knew it not. There is no room in the world for the piper of the olden
time; there is room for the piper of the olden time when he adapts
himself to modern circumstances. That he has done, and the result is
that the pipes are more the national instrument of Scotland than ever
they were.

Foremost among the agencies which have kept alive the taste for pipe
music are the Highland Society of London and the Highland Society of
Scotland. The latter, founded in 1784, interested itself more
particularly in agricultural matters and the general welfare of the
people, but the former, established six years earlier for the special
purpose of preserving the language, music, and literature of the
Highlands, has done grand work. By deciding, on 12th July, 1781, “that a
Pipe and Flag be given annually by this Society to the best Performer on
the Highland Bagpipe, at the October Falkirk Tryst,” it practically
inaugurated the system of competitions which has done so much to
encourage rising talent, and without which no young piper could hope in
these days to come prominently before the public. Many other
organisations in different parts of Scotland, and in different parts of
the world, have done good work in the same cause, but the winning of the
Highland Society of London’s gold medal is still the highest honour
coveted by the ambitious piper. The annual competition began with a
salute to the Society by its own piper. This was followed by a dance.
Then three or more of the competitors each played a pibroch. Then there
was another dance and more pibrochs until the list of the competitors
was exhausted. The judges then retired to consider their verdict, and by
and by the prizes were distributed by the president. This, with a few
alterations, may be said to be the programme at competitions to this
day.

The Society’s first competition was held in 1781, at Falkirk Tryst, the
first prize being a new set of pipes and 40 merks Scots, and the second
and third each 30 merks. Thirteen pipers competed, and the judges were
so placed that they could hear, but not see, the players. Each
competitor played four different tunes, and the winner of the first
prize was Patrick Mac Gregor, piper to Henry Balnaves of Ardradour. The
second was Charles Mac Arthur, piper to the Earl of Eglinton, and the
third John Mac Gregor, a man of 73, piper to Lieutenant-Colonel Campbell
of Glenlyon. The winner of the first prize, curiously enough, wanted the
third finger of the “upper” hand, but he was uncommonly clever at using
the little finger instead. For this reason he was known as _Patrick na
Coraig_. The competition was superintended by a “branch” of the Highland
Society of London, which existed in Glasgow.

The competition was held at Falkirk until 1783, when the award of the
committee caused so much dissatisfaction that a number of the candidates
resorted to Edinburgh in quest of other patronage. There a new committee
was formed and arrangements made for another competition. At this Mac
Donald of Clan Ranald presided, and after the prizes had been awarded,
the pipers, twelve in number, marched round St. Andrew Square playing
“Clan Ranald’s March.” This revolt of competitors resulted in the
formation, in 1784, of the Highland Society of Scotland, which
afterwards co-operated with that of London in the matter of
competitions. The 1784 gathering was held in “the Assembly Hall, back of
the City Guard,” better known afterwards as the Commercial Bank. In 1785
the place of meeting was rooms in West Register Street, long since
pulled down, and among those present was “Professor” Mac Arthur, the
last of the hereditary pipers to Mac Donald of the Isles. He opened the
proceedings with a salute to the Society and closed with “Clan Ranald’s
March,” both played in masterly style. There were twenty-five
competitors, and fifty-two pieces were played. Afterwards the
competition was held in various places, including a church, but at last
the gathering found a home in what was then the Adelphi Theatre. From
the first up till 1826 the gathering was annual. Then it became
triennial, but whether the change was an improvement is questionable. It
resulted, for one thing, in fewer first-rate performers presenting
themselves. At all the competitions private rehearsals were held in
advance, when those obviously unfit were weeded out and the programme
thereby shortened. The first gold medal offered by the Highland Society
of London was won in 1835 by John Mac Kenzie, piper to the Marquis of
Breadalbane. Present day competitions differ only in matters of detail
from those of former years. The plan of keeping the performers out of
sight of the judges has been abandoned. That, too, was a questionable
step. There is often a deal of heartburning over the decisions, and
charges of partiality are often flung at the judges. The dissatisfaction
of candidates has made itself felt most often at local competitions,
where the judges knew all the men. There are, of course, many
difficulties. The music is of such a peculiar character, subject to so
few hard and fast rules, and leaving so much to the taste of the
performer; it is, besides, produced in a continuous torrent, by quickly
following players, many of whom are almost equal in skill. The ordinary
auditor is simply bewildered, and remembers little beyond a confusion of
noises, and with the judges themselves the final decision is often a
matter of difficulty. But there are not many judges like those who
presided over the piping competitions at the great Jubilee gathering at
Balmoral in 1887. William Mac Lennan got all the firsts for open
dancing, and as he was the only first-class piper present he felt sure
of all the firsts for piping. But he only came in second. Whereupon he
inquired of the judges what mistake he had made.

“Oh, nae mistake,” they said. “Ye played capital.”

“Surely, then,” he asked, “I was entitled to first prize?”

“Maybe ye wis; but, ye see, ye had a’ the firsts for dancing.”

“But was I not the best dancer?”

“Nae doot aboot that.”

“And was I not the best piper, too?”

“We’re no sayin’ but ye wis.”

“But I thought the best piper ought to get the first prize!”

“Oh, nae doot; but we thocht ye had gotten plenty already.”

Mac Lennan always told this story afterwards with great glee. “Do you
know,” he would say, “these judges were the most interesting men I ever
met. I wonder what they would have done if the competitor was a hammer-
thrower or a jumper. They could not say thirty feet was less than
twenty-five feet.

Taken all over, however, the bigger competitions are honourably
conducted, and the best men always come out first. These now competing
are mostly the retainers of titled gentlemen, with a number of private
individuals who unite to an ordinary occupation an enthusiasm for the
pipes. There are several ways in which the gatherings could be improved
and made more interesting to the general public and of more value to the
devotees of the pipes. The names of the tunes played might be published
with the list of results, as well as the names of the prize-winners;
prizes might be offered for new tunes, and for essays on the history or
merits of tunes; and thus composition would be stimulated; and, above
all, the old plan whereby the player was kept out of sight of the judge
might be reintroduced. The judging at local competitions is often looked
on as a joke, and not worth protesting against. Were the judges ignorant
of the identity of the players, the charge of favouritism could not be
made, and that in itself would be a great step gained. If pipers would
form a society among themselves and insist on only thoroughly competent
men being allowed to act as judges the charge of ignorance of the music
would fall to the ground. And again, some attempt might be made to put a
stop to the liberty which everybody seems to have to organise a
competition, call it “amateur championship” or whatever he likes, issue
medals of little or no value, and pocket the receipts. All the
gatherings, say in Scotland, could be managed by one organisation, a
pipers’ society such as that suggested, or a more comprehensive Highland
society of some kind, and a certain uniformity of grades in confined and
open and amateur and professional competitions introduced which would
give confidence to the competitors, make the principal prizes a known
quantity, and interest the general public in the results. That, of
course, would not preclude the holding of competitions under the
auspices of well-known and accredited athletic or patriotic
organisations.

The idea of competing with each other, even with no inducement in the
way of medals or prizes, is an old one. It has given inspiration to the
novelist, and Robert Louis Stevenson in one of the best passages of
_Kidnapped_ tells how Alan Breck and a son of Rob Roy exchanged a duel
with swords for a duel with pipes, and finished very good friends
indeed. “Robin Oig,” said Alan, when the duel was over, “ye are a great
piper. I am not fit to blow in the same kingdom with ye. Body of me! ye
have mair music in your sporran than I have in my head; and though it
still sticks in my mind that I could maybe show ye another of it with
the cold steel, I warn ye beforehand—it’ll no be fair! It would go
against my heart to haggle a man that can blow the pipes as you can.” At
swordsmanship it is certain that Alan would not have come off second
best.

After competitions, perhaps the next potent force in keeping alive the
music of the pipes is bands—regimental, volunteer, police, and private.
Regimental bands have already been referred to at length, and of the
others, although a good many exist, there is little to be said. The
Glasgow Highlanders are said to possess more men who can play the pipes
than any other volunteer battalion, and they have no less than four pipe
bands in the regiment. The 1st Sutherland H.R.V. again have the
strongest pipe band in the kingdom, if not in the world. There are
seventy members, and although they live far from each other, scattered
over an extensive and wild county, they are brought together regularly
for training, and have reached a high degree of efficiency.

The only police band now in Scotland is that of Govan, which may be said
to have been the first pipe band in connection with any police force. It
was started in 1885, and is now more popular than ever, thanks to the
encouraging care of Chief Constable Hamilton. The members of the force
all take a thorough interest in the band, and when it plays in the
public parks of Glasgow and neighbourhood it is always listened to by
large crowds of the general public. The necessary funds are provided by
two concerts annually, and the men cost the burgh nothing, either in the
way of time lost from ordinary duty, or in the way of financial
assistance. The tartan of the band is specially made to a pattern
designed by the Chief Constable.

[Illustration:

  GOVAN POLICE BAND
]

The fact that “people of quality” keep pipers also helps wonderfully to
preserve the music. The Sovereign’s example in this respect has been
followed by a great many of the old nobility, and even these men who
rise from the ranks, and whose only claim for admission into
aristocratic circles is their wealth, must needs do as the others do. In
other words, it is now fashionable to keep a piper. Non-Highlanders have
adopted the kilt—the once proscribed dress—and wear it while holidaying
in the Highlands, and whether or not they appreciate pipe music, they
have it. This results in a state of affairs not always pleasing to the
true Highlander, but it does much to preserve what the true Highlander,
if left to himself in these latter days, would certainly neglect. There
is undoubtedly a lot of sham and affectation about the Highland
sentiment of to-day, but that is inevitable, and so long as with it all
the old customs are maintained, we ought not to grumble.

As to the quality of the music in these days of ours, it is to be feared
that since the piper became a domestic servant he has found it to his
interest to cultivate the tastes of strangers, and hence the warlike
character of the pipes has been considerably toned down. The composition
of salutes and pibrochs is still attempted, and with a certain degree of
success, but pipers would gain quite as much credit by paying more
attention to the first-rate works of their predecessors as by composing
and playing tunes of their own. Where a musical ear is accompanied by
scientific knowledge, the present-day piper has a great advantage over
those of a hundred years ago, but the fact remains that there are no
tunes like the old tunes, and their intrinsic merit is the pride of the
piping fraternity. Present-day conditions are not conducive to the
production of good music, and we should be glad that we have a race of
men capable of adequately interpreting the old.

The emigration boom that existed before and after 1870 resulted in the
music and language of Scotland being scattered all over the world. In
all the British colonies there are Highland societies, and competitions
are held periodically, at which bagpipe playing is a prominent feature.
In consequence, the exportation of pipes from Scotland has increased,
and is still increasing. But the long distances between townships in the
colonies tells very severely on the efforts of the Highland clubs. In
Sydney, New South Wales, for instance, there are from twelve to twenty
pipers, and a pipe band in connection with the Sydney Scottish
Volunteers, the members of which practice all the year round. There is a
big gathering on New Year’s Day, at which some 20,000 people usually
assemble, and another similar gathering no less than 400 miles away. In
November there is a gathering at Newcastle, sixty miles distant, and in
January another at Goulburn, 130 miles by rail. So it is not easy for
pipers to attend where prizes may be won. The only places, again, where
pipes are made, or piping is taught, are in the towns of Sydney and
Melbourne. Some of the native-born pipers are good players, having been
taught by those who came from Scotland, and many of the old tunes are
favourites, though the Colonials generally prefer the newer styles. The
highest prize given is £5 for each event, but £3 for pibrochs, and £5,
£4, £2, and £1 for marches, strathspeys, and reels grouped together is
more common. Putting the three events together is a sore point with the
Colonial pipers, and a strong effort is being made to restore the prize-
list to its original form, giving three prizes for each event. The
Pipers’ Association of Sydney have already started a movement for
obtaining a voice in the choice of judges, and have been so far
successful that their nominee was appointed last year, with the result
that there was general satisfaction. This might be particularly noted by
home pipers.

In Canada, says the late Mr. Alexander Mac Kenzie, the jumping, tossing
the caber, stone throwing, and various other Highland competitions,
would do credit to some of the best athletes at home gatherings,
although, he adds, “the pipe music was nowhere.” Since he travelled
through Canada, however, there have been great improvements, and the
visits of leading pipers from home have borne good fruit. Canada now has
her own Highland pipers and dancers, reared on her own soil but on the
home model, not perhaps so good as the best at home, but better than the
average. Scotland abroad is more Highland than Scotland at home, and the
hope of the future of the language and music lies as much in Canada and
Australia as it does in Argyllshire, Perthshire, or Inverness-shire.

It was Sir Walter Scott who wrote:—

  “The Highlands may become the fairy ground for romance and poetry or
  subject of experiment for the professors of speculation, political and
  economical. But if the hour of need should come—and it may not perhaps
  be far distant—the pibroch may sound through the deserted regions, but
  the summons will remain unanswered. The children who have left her
  will re-echo from a distant shore the sounds with which they took
  leave of their own.—_Cha till, cha till, cha till, sinn tuillie._—We
  return, we return, we return no more,”

but the Wizard of the North hardly saw into the future so clearly as he
might have done. Had he seen the latest war in South Africa, he would
not have put the “return no more” so strongly. The hour of need did
come, the pibroch did sound, and from Canada, Australia, and New Zealand
the answer came, in the shape of regiments of loyal Britons, who fought
and died for the old land. There is now a far bigger Scotland than ever
existed, or could exist, between Maiden Kirk and John o’ Groats. Thus
has good come out of evil.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER XXI.
                         THE OLDEST PIPE TUNES.

                  “At present I’ll content mysel’,
                  A hamely Scottish tale to tell,
                  Whilk happened years and years back;
                  An’ says tradition its a fact:
                  Be’t true or no I canna say,
                  I was nae up to see the day,
                  But took the story upon credit,
                  An’ I shall gie it—as I had it.”

  Unreliability of tradition—Lost in antiquity—Occasions of tunes—
    Interest of stories—The Mac Raes’ March—Story of “Suarachan”—Hal o’
    the Wynd—The Mac Intosh’s Lament—Two different stories—_A Cholla mo
    run_—Duntroon’s Salute—The Campbell’s are coming.


It serves no good purpose to indulge in regrets for that which is past,
but one cannot help feeling sorry that the story of our national music
is so scrappy and so unreliable. There is, indeed, a large quantity of
material of a kind, and on a cursory examination one may think the
stories of the origin of tunes are plentiful enough. But when one begins
to go deeper and trace each story to its source, reconcile all its
different versions and explain how the same incident crops up in another
place, under different circumstances, perhaps even in connection with
another tune, it is then that the task of making intelligible, and at
the same time trustworthy, stories for melodies that are now so well
known, becomes difficult. Precise dates have been given for many tunes,
but it is obvious enough that the writers giving them, though doubtless
good pipers, were but little conversant with the facts of history. Very
few, indeed, of the older tunes can be authenticated. With them it is
truly a case of being lost in the mists of antiquity. It is too often
assumed that a tune having a direct reference to a certain historical
incident, is itself of the date of that incident, while the chances are
that it was composed on that incident by a piper who lived many years
after. Because Shakespeare wrote Macbeth we do not conclude that he
lived in Macbeth’s day. A composer, like a dramatist, has all history
spread out before him, and can make his music on what he pleases. We
have, for instance, a piece of pipe music called “The Battle of Harlaw,”
but, though we know that it is very old, we have no reason to think
that, in its present form, it was in existence in 1411. So with very
many others. When the events they celebrate took place, very few, if
any, of the actors could write, and it was a long time after that the
matters referred to became part of written history. When the tunes were
composed must, therefore, be decided, when it can be decided at all, by
other evidence—by historical data regarding the lives of their composers
or by references in the authentic history of the country. Such data and
references are, however, because of the lack of education in the times
when the accurate information could be got, very scarce, and the result
is that, although many of the older tunes have been first favourites
from time immemorial, no one has any idea of how they came into being.

There was always a fine vein of poesy and music among the Celts, and
they readily composed rhymes and tunes which powerfully affected the
imagination. They had magnificent memories, cultivated, of course, by
that very lack of written books to which I have referred, and into their
tunes they compressed the sentiments of past centuries, and the troubles
and joys of everyday life. Noted incidents induced commemoration. The
birth of an heir to the ancient clan, the death of the chief, a victory
in battle, the home-coming or departure of any notable personage, were
all fit subjects for the genius of the clan piper, and were often
utilised as such. Where we can prove that the tune was composed when the
incident, of which we know the date, occurred, we are on sure ground.
When we cannot we are none the wiser. Each clan had its own music,
almost all of high antiquity, and all of the class common to the Gael,
but we can no more fix the origin of the music than we can fix the
origin of the clan. The Munros have a pibroch composed on the battle of
_Bealach na Broige_, an event which took place about 1350, and there is
the tradition in the Clan Menzies that their piper played at
Bannockburn, but in neither case is the matter of any use as history.
“The Desperate Battle of Perth” is alleged to date from 1395, “The Mac
Raes’ March” from 1477, and “Mac Intosh’s Lament” from 1526. In each
case, however, tradition is the only original authority, and to
tradition a hundred years are often as one day, and one day as a hundred
years.

But the fact that we cannot fix exact dates does not impair the value of
the stories, as stories. And it is as stories, traditions if you will,
that we wish to recall them now, if only to show the atmosphere in which
our pipe music lived and moved and had its being. The stories I believe
are true, though I would not like to vouch for the accuracy of the names
of characters and places in every instance, no more than for that of the
dates. The incident recorded may have taken place at some other time, in
some other place, and with some other people, and tradition may have
mixed up names and figures. But there must have been such an incident
sometime, somehow, somewhere in the Highlands. So long as we know that
it did not originate in the imagination of the story-teller, it
illustrates men and manners just as well as if we could swear by all its
details. And as it throws light on the circumstances in which Highland
music was so often composed, it lends a new interest to the study of
that music. I give, I need hardly add, in each case, that version of the
story which I consider best authenticated, told, whenever possible, in
the form that is of greatest interest.

Let us take the first two or three in the order of their traditional
dates:—


                         “THE MAC RAES’ MARCH”

is the oldest known pipe tune. The Lord of the Isles invaded Ross-shire
about 1477 with a numerous army, and laid waste the country of the Mac
Kenzies, burning a chapel at Contin. The Mac Kenzies took the field to
protect their lands and property, and in an endeavour to recover the
booty from the Mac Donalds they asked the assistance of the Mac Raes.
The Mac Raes joined them, and the Mac Donalds were defeated with great
slaughter. In the ranks of the Mac Raes there fought Duncan Mac Rae, an
orphan, familiarly known by the name of _Suarachan_, a term of contempt.
His prowess on this occasion was remarkable, and fully entitled him to
higher consideration. He slew a notable man in the Mac Donald ranks, and
then calmly sat down on the body, as if no more was required of him. Mac
Kenzie was astonished at the action of this ally of his, and exclaimed:—

“Why sit you so, when your help is so much needed?”

“If paid like a man, I will fight like a man,” replied Mac Rae. “If
everyone does as much as I have done the day is yours.”

“Kill your two and you shall have the wages of two,” said the chief.

_Suarachan_ obeyed, and again sat down on the corpse.

“Kill your three,” shouted the Mac Kenzie; “nay, fight on, and I will
reckon with you for the dead.”

_Suarachan_ thereupon got up, and dealt fearful destruction among the
Mac Donalds, killing sixteen with his own hand, and thus proved his
worth. He was ever afterwards held in high esteem, and became a leading
man in the clan, acquiring the honourable name of “Duncan of the Axe.”
It was an axe he wielded with such dread purpose on the field of battle.
The pibroch was composed in his honour and in memory of the conflict,
and has always been the march of the clan.

The resemblance between the story and that of Hal o’ the Wynd in Scott’s
_Fair Maid of Perth_ is too striking to pass unnoticed. Hal, at the
battle on the North Inch of Perth, acted exactly as _Suarachan_ did at
Contin. Which is the original story, or whether the two are different
stories it is hard to determine. It would be interesting to know where
Sir Walter got the legend on which he based the Hal o’ the Wynd
incident.


                       “THE MAC INTOSH’S LAMENT,”

on the authority of The Mac Intosh himself, dates from 1550. Writing in
1885 the chief said:—“The tune is as old as 1550 or thereabout. Angus
Mac Kay in his pipe music book gives it 1526, and says it was composed
on the death of Lauchlan, the fourteenth laird, but we believe that it
was composed by the famous family bard Mac Intyre, on the death of
William, who was murdered by the Countess of Huntly in 1550. This bard
had seen, within the space of forty years, four captains of the Clan
Chattan meet with violent deaths, and his deep feeling found vent in the
refrain:—

                       ‘Mac Intosh the excellent
                       They have lifted.
                       They have laid thee
                       Low, they have laid thee.’

These are the only words in existence which I can hear of.”

There is, however, another tradition connected with the tune. There was
a prediction, believed among the clansmen, that the Mac Intosh of that
day would die through the instrumentality of his beautiful black steed,
whose glossy skin shone as the raven’s wing, and whose flowing mane and
tail waved free as the wind itself. But the chief, whatever he felt, was
determined to show his people that he treated the prediction lightly,
and so he continued to ride his favourite, in spite of the entreaties of
his friends. He rode him on the day of his marriage, and on the way to
church the horse became more than usually restive. He reared and
plunged, and behaved so badly that the rider, losing control of himself
and his horse, drew his pistol and shot the favourite dead. Another, a
piebald horse, was procured, and the company proceeded to church. After
the ceremony they returned by the way they had come, the bride and her
maids on white ponies, and the bridegroom and his friends following. The
chief’s horse, in passing, shied at the body of the black horse, which
lay by the wayside, and the rider was thrown to the ground and killed on
the spot. A turn of the road hid the accident from those in front, and
the bride, unconscious of what had happened, went on her way. She is
said to have composed and chanted the air as, at the funeral, she moved
at the head of the bier, marking the time by tapping on the coffin lid
all the way to the grave, where she had to be torn away as the body was
being lowered in:—

     “Oh! my love, lowly laid, Oh! my love, lowly laid;
     Oh! my love, lowly laid, beside the fatal wall breach!

 Wife am I, sorrowful in my weeds of deep woe,
 Since I heard, with heart sore pained, that henceforth I must wear them.

     Th’ piebald horse laid thee low, th’ piebald horse laid thee low,
     The piebald horse laid thee low, beside the fatal wall breach.

 Maiden waesome sad am I, whom scarce know they since the day
 When he fixed the marriage ring then on my finger gaily.

     Oh! alas, I wasn’t there, Oh! alas, I wasn’t there,
     Oh! alas, I wasn’t there, by thy right hand to take thee.

 Oh, I am filled with grief, tear-drops streaming down my cheek,
 Mourning for my youthful chief, who newly rode the piebald.

     Rider of th’ bounding black, bounding black, bounding black,
     Rider of th’ bounding black, so mangled by the piebald.


 To the feast I’ll not go, nor where merriment fast flows,
 Since in waking of the spring an arrow pierced me sorely.

     My young Hugh, lowly laid, lowly laid, lowly laid;
     My young Hugh, lowly laid in debris of the wall breach.

 I am sad, sore sad and wae, since in dust they low thee laid
 My farewell I pray thee take, to stones in Dun high standing.

     My young Hugh lowly laid, lowly laid, lowly laid;
     My young Hugh, lowly laid, alas! and I not near thee.

 Thou couldst dance with grace and glee, when they sang sweet melody;
 The grass blade scarce would bent down be by thy quick tread so lightly.

         Och an och! lowly laid, och an och! lowly laid,
         Och an och! lowly laid, beside the fatal wall breach.”

Another set of words were taken down in 1872 from the singing of _Mor
Nighean Alasdair Mhic Ruaraidh_ in Barra. The English here given is not,
however, a translation of this, but what is practically a third set,
written by Mr. Malcolm Mac Farlane, Paisley, to give some idea of the
rhythm of the tune:—

               “Hark the pipes’ piercing wail
               Sounding clear on the gale
               As they bear adown the vale,
                   My brave, my noble marrow.
               Pride of the Heilan’s, chief of his clan,
               Ever in danger leading the van—
               Death ne’er laid a fairer man
                   Within his chamber narrow.

               Day of dool! day of woe!
               Day that saw Evan low,
               Ne’er shalt thou from memory go
                   While’s life’s dim lamp is burning.
               In the morn a bride was I;
               Wife when noonday’s sun was high;
               Ere its light had left the sky
                   I was a widow mourning.

               What is life now to me
               Since they’ve ta’en ye frae me?
               What again can pleasure gie?
                   What dispel my sorrow?
               Life was sweet, I was gay
               Love was short and joy’s away;
               Grief has come, but grief will stay,
                   Renewed with every morrow.”


                          “_A CHOLLA MO RUN._”

One of the earliest recorded instances of the bravery of a piper is
contained in the annals of our own Highlands, and is inseparably
connected with the tune known as _A Cholla mo run_, referred to in a
previous chapter.[16] It may be as well to give the story here at full
length. The hero was the piper of Coll Kitto, or left-handed Coll, who
landed in Islay with the advance party of an expedition from Ireland,
with instructions to take the Castle of Dunivaig by surprise, should he
find that this could be attempted with any degree of success. The
Campbells, however, had heard of the expedition, and they drew the party
into an ambush and made them prisoners. All were hung off-hand, except
the piper, who asked leave first to play a lament over his comrades. The
chief of the Campbells had heard of the fame of this piper, and, being
himself fond of music, he granted the request, taking care, however, to
put cattle in the way of those of Coll Kitto’s people who might follow
the advance party, which would distract their attention, while his men
could fall on them as they did on the others. The piper saw and
understood the arrangements, and adapted his pibroch to the occasion, so
that the warning and lamenting notes could not fail to be understood by
his comrades. The chief of the Campbells also understood, and on finding
himself over-reached he plunged his dirk into the piper, who smiled
proudly even in death, for he knew he had saved his friends. The
lamenting notes represented in this tune by “We are in their hands, we
are in their hands,” and the warning notes represented by “leave the
cattle, leave the cattle,” are exceedingly touching, and Coll Kitto,
when he heard the pibroch, at once knew that his advance party was in
trouble, and that the piper wished him to keep away from the island.
Accordingly he turned his _birlins_, that is, boats, and left for a less
dangerous locality. The words, when translated, are far from having the
power and beauty of the Gaelic, but they will serve to show somewhat how
the old pipers were supposed to speak by their music to those who
understood them:—

Footnote 16:

  See page 92.

         “Coll, array; be ready, depart;
         Be ready, depart; be ready, depart;
         Coll, array; be ready, depart;
         We are in their hands, we are in their hands.

         Leave the cattle, leave the cattle, leave the cattle,
         Leave the cattle, leave the cattle, leave the cattle,
         Leave the cattle, leave the cattle, leave the cattle,
         We are in their hands, we are in their hands.

         An oar, a baler, an oar, a baler,
         An oar, a baler, an oar, a baler,
         An oar, a baler, an oar, a baler,
         We are in their hands, we are in their hands.”

This was supposed to represent embarking quickly. A “baler” was a dish
for throwing water out of the boat.

             “The red hand, the red hand, the red hand,
             The red hand, the red hand, the red hand,
             The red hand, the red hand, the red hand,
             We are in their hands, we are in their hands.”

In this the piper hinted to his friends to call the Mac Donalds to their
aid before attacking the Castle.

            “Coll of my love, avoid the strait,
            Avoid the strait, avoid the strait;
            Coll of my love, go by the Mull;
            Gain the landing place, gain the landing place.”

This was a warning to “avoid the strait,” and hasten to secure a landing
place in the shelter of the Mull of Kintyre.

             “Coll of my love, avoid the castle,
             Avoid the castle, avoid the castle;
             Coll of my love, avoid the castle;
             We are in their hands, we are in their hands.”

That is one version of the story. There are several others, all more or
less similar. The tune is connected by tradition with two or three
places in the Highlands, notably with two castles in Argyllshire—
Duntroon, near Crinan (destroyed by fire in June, 1899), and, as already
stated, with Dunivaig, in Islay. In 1647, another version of the story
goes: Campbell of Calder was commissioned by Argyll to proceed against
Mac Donald (Coll Kitto) and expel him from Islay, where he had taken up
his residence with some followers. Mac Donald, it seems, was a sort of
thorn in the flesh to Argyll, and continually troubled him. In this case
Calder, assisted by several troops of Campbells and others, razed the
Castle of Dunad, where Coll was, to the ground, but Mac Donald himself
escaped to Dunivaig, where he was again besieged. Finding his forces too
weak, he took boat by night to procure assistance from Kintyre or
Ireland, leaving the castle in charge of his mother. Calder having
discovered this, determined to increase his own strength, and retired
for that purpose, leaving his troops under the lady of Dunstaffnage, a
bold, masculine woman. While the male leaders were absent, the wooden
pipe conveying water to the castle was discovered, and the supply cut
off, with the result that Coll’s garrison surrendered. The night after,
the piper, whose profession ensured respect, recognised his master’s
boat coming back, and that he might apprise him of danger, he asked
leave to play a piece of music he had composed on the misfortunes of the
party. The request was granted, and he played:—

                 “Coll, O my dear, dinna come near,
                 Dinna come near, dinna come near,
                 Coll, O my dear, dinna come near,
                 I’m prisoner here, I’m prisoner here.”

Coll Kitto at once recognised the warning, turned his boat, and escaped.
The Lady of Dunstaffnage saw how she had been out-witted, and she made
the piper play on the top of the highest hill in Islay tunes of the
merriest kind, and then ordered his fingers to be cut off so that he
might never play again. The hill is known to this day as “The Hill of
the Bloody Hand.”

In pretty much the same way the story is associated with Duntroon
Castle, only there are no women in it, so it is difficult to say which
is correct. But it is plain enough that the incident itself is
authentic, although it is doubtless exaggerated, and tradition is
somewhat hazy as to the proper location.


                          “DUNTROON’S SALUTE.”

Another tune—“Duntroon’s Salute”—is mixed up with _A Cholla mo run_ in a
rather peculiar way, a way that suggests that the origin of the one is
somehow being attributed to the other. Sir Alexander Mac Donald,
_Alister Mac Cholla Chiotaich_, so this story goes, made a raid on
Argyllshire in 1644 (the dates are irreconcilable with the accepted
facts of the two stories), and surrounded Duntroon Castle, with the
object of cutting off every person inside in revenge for the murder of
his father’s piper. He himself, with a fleet of galleys, besieged the
castle from the seaward side, and he ordered his piper to play the “Mac
Donalds’ March.” Instead, however, the piper, on the spur of the moment,
composed and played a war cry to alarm Duntroon. After saluting Duntroon
and wishing him good health, he warned him of his danger, pointed out
that the enemy were ready to attack him by sea and land, from right and
left and front. The tune was understood on shore and also on board Mac
Donald’s boat, and the poor piper was instantly hung from the yard-arm.
Mac Donald finding he could not reduce Duntroon, moved northward,
following out his work of destruction. The tune composed and played on
this occasion is still known as “Duntroon’s Salute,” and that there is
some truth in the story is shown by the way in which it seems to
represent the sound of waves breaking against rocks. The exact relations
between its origin and that of _A Cholla mo run_ would, however, do with
a little clearing up. It may be mentioned as a fact that some years ago
a body was found buried within Duntroon, which was evidently that of the
piper referred to in the tradition. At anyrate his finger bones were
awanting, a fact which goes to prove the second Dunivaig story. But how,
then, did the piper come to be buried in Duntroon?


                       “THE CAMPBELLS ARE COMING”

dates so far back in the centuries that we fail to trace its origin. It
has been the march of the clan for hundreds of years. There is an old
Gaelic song sung to the air, which tradition says was the composition of
a piper. This piper, in the course of his vocation, was at a wedding in
Inveraray, where he was inhospitably treated. Smarting under a sense of
injury, he composed the song:—

       “I was at a wedding in the town of Inveraray,
       I was at a wedding in the town of Inveraray,
       I was at a wedding in the town of Inveraray,
         Most wretched of weddings, with nothing but shell-fish,”

thus mercilessly lashing his churlish host. The wedding evidently was so
poor that all the company got was limpets, and the song is another hit
at the poverty of Inveraray. Burns echoed it when he wrote:—

               “There’s naething here but Highland pride,
                 And Highland scab and hunger;
               If Providence has sent me here
                 ’Twas surely in his anger.”

The tradition, by the way, was so implicitly believed in, that the
playing of the tune at a wedding, up to a comparatively recent date, was
regarded as a premeditated insult.

One curious story is told of the tune. Not very many years ago the
steamer _Cygnet_ was sailing in a Highland loch when a sailor’s wife
gave birth to twins. The fact was noticed more particularly because a
few years before, in the same steamer, under the same captain, and at
the same place, a similar event had taken place. On the first occasion
the mother was a Mrs. Campbell, and, strangely enough, just when the
twins were born, a piper on board happened to be playing vigorously “The
Campbells are Coming,” quite ignorant of the additions that had just
been made to the passenger list.

The tune was played by the 78th Highlanders when coming to the relief of
Lucknow, and was that heard by Jessie of Lucknow—if there was such a
person—as she lay half asleep on the ground.




                             CHAPTER XXII.
                      SOME WORLD-FAMOUS PIBROCHS.

      “Oh, heard ye yon pibroch sound sad on the gale,
      Where a band cometh slowly with weeping and wail,
      ’Tis the chief of Glenara laments for his dear,
      And her sire and her people are called to the bier.”
                                                      —_Campbell._

  Mac Crimmon’s Lament—Best known of all pipe tunes—Its story—Blackie’s
    poetry—Scott’s—The war tune of Glengarry—A tragic story—The pibroch
    o’ Donuil Dhu—Too long in this condition—Pipers and inhospitality—
    Oh, that I had three hands—Lochaber no more—Allan Ramsay’s verses—An
    elated Mac Crimmon—Rory _Mòr’s_ Lament—Clan Farlane pibroch—Pipers,
    poetry, and superstition.


There are several reasons why “Mac Crimmon’s Lament” should be the best
known of all pipe tunes, but the most important is the fact that it is,
and must ever continue to be, inseparably associated with the famous
pipers of Dunvegan. The tune was composed by a piper who was leaving
home, and had a presentiment that he would never return, but it has
often been used in other circumstances. In the evicting days, when
Highlanders were compelled to emigrate from their native shores, the
favourite air when they were embarking was

                         “_CHA TILL MI TUILLE_”

(I’ll return no more), and on many other mournful occasions the lament
of the Mac Crimmons was made the means of expressing the feelings of
Highlanders. It was composed in 1746 by Donald _Bàn_ Mac Crimmon, then
piper to Mac Leod of Dunvegan. Donald _Bàn_ was considered the best
piper of his day, and when the clan left Dunvegan to join the Royalists
in 1746, he was deeply impressed with the idea that he himself would
never again see the old castle. The parting of the clansmen with their
wives and children was sad, and Donald _Bàn_, thinking of his own
sweetheart, poured forth his soul in the sad wail of the Lament, as the
Mac Leods were marching away from the castle. The clan afterwards took
part in a skirmish, which, from the peculiar circumstances, is known to
history as the “Rout of Moy,” and Mac Crimmon was shot close by the side
of his chief.

The Gaelic words usually associated with the lament are supposed to have
been sung by Donald _Bàn’s_ sweetheart, but they are in all likelihood
of much later date. The chorus, however, is probably as old as the tune,
but the complete verses first appeared in print in 1835, in a collection
of _Popular Gaelic Songs_ by John Mac Kenzie, of the _Beauties of Gaelic
Poetry_, where the words are said to have been taken from an old Skye
manuscript. Translated into English they lose much of their plaintive
melody, and make but a poor means of conveying an idea of the tune to
the non-Gaelic reader:—

    “The mountain mist flows deep on Cullin,
    The fay sings her elegy sorrowful;
    Mild blue eyes in the Duin are in tears,
    Since he departed and refused to return.

        He returns not, returns not, returns not, Mac Crimmon,
        From war and conflict the warrior refuses to return.
        He returns not, returns not, Mac Crimmon would not return,
        He will return no more until the day of the last gathering.

    The winds of the wold among the boughs are wailing,
    Each streamlet and burn is sad on the hills;
    The minstrels of the boughs are singing mournfully,
    Since he departed and will never return.

        He returns not, etc.

    The night is clouded, sorrowful and sad,
    The birlin under sail, but reluctant to depart,
    The waves of the sea have a sound not happy,
    Lamenting that he departed and will never return.

        He returns not, etc.

    Gather will not the tuneful race of Duin in the evening,
    While echo with alacrity and joy answers them;
    The youths and maidens are without music lamenting
    That he departed from us and will never return.

        He returns not, etc.”

This is perhaps too literal a rendering. Let us try Professor Blackie’s
version. Blackie was an enthusiast for everything Celtic, and beautified
everything in Celtic literature that his pen touched. A comparison of
the two translations shows this:—

         “Round Cullin’s peak the mist is sailing,
         The banshee croons her note of wailing,
         Mild blue eyes with sorrow are streaming,
         For him that shall never return, Mac Crimmon!

             No more, no more, no more for ever,
             In war or peace, shall return Mac Crimmon;
             No more, no more, no more for ever,
             Shall love or gold bring back Mac Crimmon.

         The breeze on the hills is mournfully blowing,
         The brook in the hollow is plaintively flowing,
         The warblers, the soul of the grove, are mourning
         For Mac Crimmon that’s gone with no hope of returning.

             No more, etc.

         The tearful clouds the stars are veiling,
         The sails are spread, but the boat is not sailing,
         The waves of the sea are moaning and mourning
         For Mac Crimmon that’s gone to find no returning.

             No more, etc.

         No more on the hill at the festal meeting
         The pipe shall sound with the festal greeting,
         And lads and lasses change mirth to mourning,
         For him that’s gone to know no returning.

             No more, etc.”

The story of the origin of the tune which I have given is that generally
accepted as historically accurate. There is, however, a tradition that
after the passing of the Heritable Jurisdiction Bill in 1747 practically
abolished the office of hereditary piper, Donald _Dubh_ Mac Crimmon, the
last of the race, who died in 1822 at the age of ninety-one, composed
the lament on his departure for Canada. The sentiment is hardly that
which one might expect from a departing emigrant, but rather what a
piper might give expression to on leaving for the wars, a fact which
tells against the tradition. Nevertheless, the tune has been turned into
an emigrant’s farewell on many occasions, and the last verse of Sir
Walter Scott’s composition connected with the tune, shows that the poet
accepted the air as such, to some extent at least:—

       Mac Leod’s wizard flag from the grey castle sallies,
       The rowers are seated, unmoor’d are the galleys;
       Gleam war-axe and broadsword, clang target and quiver,
       As Mac Crimmon sings ‘Farewell to Dunvegan for ever!
       Farewell to each cliff on which breakers are foaming;
       Farewell each dark glen in which red deer are roaming,
       Farewell lonely Skye, to lake, mountain, and river,
       Mac Leod may return, but Mac Crimmon shall never!

       ‘Farewell the bright clouds that on Quillan are sleeping;
       Farewell the bright eyes in the dun that are weeping;
       To each minstrel delusion farewell—and for ever—
       Mac Crimmon departs to return to you never!
       The banshee’s wild voice sings the death dirge before me,
       The pall of the dead for a mantle hangs o’er me;
       But my heart shall not flag and my nerve shall not shiver,
       Though devoted I go—to return again never!

       ‘Too oft shall the note of Mac Crimmon’s bewailing
       Be heard when the Gael on their exile are sailing;
       Dear land! to the shores whence unwilling we sever;
       Return—return—return we shall never!

             ‘_Cha till, cha till, cha till, sinn tuille!
             Cha till, cha till, cha till, sinn tuille,
             Cha till, cha till, cha till, sinn tuille,
             Ged thilleas Mac Leod, bheò Mac Criomain._’

Some stories, by the way, state that Mac Crimmon himself composed the
words to suit the air, and others that they were composed by his
sweetheart at Dunvegan on hearing him playing the new lament when the
clan was leaving the castle. Still others would have it that the
sweetheart’s song was another, composed in response to that of Mac
Crimmon.

The phrase, _Cha till mi tuille_, is also associated with the story of
the piper who tried to explore a cave in Mull, which was given in a
previous chapter. The people of Skye claim the story, and say this piper
was a Mac Crimmon, but the legend is not supposed to give the origin of
the phrase. _Cha till mi tuille_ was used on many occasions as an
extempore expression of feeling on the part of a piper without any
reference to the particular tune, “Mac Crimmon’s Lament.”

If “Mac Crimmon’s Lament” is associated with a departure for the wars,
there is another tune associated very closely with war itself—so
closely, indeed, that, according to the accepted story of its origin, it
was composed while one of the most cruel deeds ever done in the name of
warfare was being perpetrated.


                    “GILLIECHROIST” or “KILLYCHRIST”

is the war tune of Glengarry, and its origin—mythical according to some
writers—is as follows:—

About the beginning of the seventeenth century there lived in Glengarry
a famous character named Allan Mac Ranald, of Lundie. He was a man of
great strength, activity, and courage, and, living as he did at a time
when the feuds between the Mac Kenzies and the Mac Donalds were at their
height, he invariably led any expedition that set out from Glengarry. In
these fighting days young Angus Mac Donald, of Glengarry, anxious to
distinguish himself, determined—though against the advice of his father—
to lead a raid into the country of the Mac Kenzies. He surprised and
defeated the Mac Kenzies, but on their way home by sea the Mac Donalds
were in their turn attacked by the Mac Kenzies, and defeated with great
slaughter. Angus Mac Donald was among the slain, and Allan of Lundie
only escaped with his life by leaping into the sea at Loch Hourn, where
the battle took place, and swimming ashore at another place. Allan was
determined to be avenged, and not long after he led a strong party of
Mac Donalds to the lands of Killychrist, near Beauly. He found the Mac
Kenzies totally unprepared, burned their lands, destroyed their crops,
and finally mercilessly set fire to a church in which a large
congregation were worshipping, driving back at the point of the sword
all who attempted to escape. Meantime he ordered Alister _Dubh_, his
piper, to play so as to drown the cries of the perishing people. Alister
thereupon blew up loud and shrill, and, after making his instrument give
utterance to a long succession of wild and unconnected notes without any
apparent meaning, he began his march round the church, playing
extemporaneously the pibroch which, under the name of “Killychrist,” has
since been used as the war tune of the Mac Donells of Glengarry. For a
short time the terrible sounds from the inside of the church mingled
with the music of the pipes, but they gradually became fainter, and at
last ceased altogether.

Allan and his comrades had little time to enjoy their victory, for the
Mac Kenzies soon gathered in overwhelming numbers, and, finding the Mac
Donells resting on a flat near Mealfourvonie, known as “the marsh of
blood,” they attacked them with great fury, and pursued them to Loch
Ness. Allan was again one of the few who escaped.

The story of the burning in the church has been altogether discredited,
but it is admitted that there was a raid, and that a large number of
cottages, as well as the manse of Killychrist, were burnt. None of the
earlier writers, however, mention the burning of the congregation. The
music itself also contradicts somewhat the traditional origin of the
tune, for when it is properly played the listener can fancy he hears the
flames rustling and blazing through the timbers, mingled with the angry
remonstrances and half-smothered shouts of the warriors, but there is no
representation of the more feeble plaints of women and children, as
there would surely have been had these been among the victims. However,
I give the story for what it is worth.


                   “_PIOBAIREACHD DHOMHNUILL DUIBH_”

is one of the oldest and best known of pipe tunes. It is said to have
been played at the Battle of Inverlochy in 1431, and it is first found
on paper in Oswald’s _Caledonian Pocket Companion_, published in 1764,
where it is entitled _Piobaireachd Mhic Dhonuill_. Afterward it appeared
in the book compiled by Captain Mac Leod of Gesto, from which it was
translated in 1815 into ordinary notation by the editor of _Albyn’s
Anthology_. Its first printed heading strengthens the title of the Mac
Donalds, who claim the tune for their clan, but the words _Donull Dubh_
are accepted as referring to Cameron of Lochiel, and the tune is known
as “Lochiel’s March.” The chief of the Camerons bears the name _Mac
Dhomhnuill Duibh_, or son of Black Donald. The air, which is the march
of the 79th or Cameron Highlanders, is a call to arms, and is
inseparably associated with Inverlochy, but whether composed and played
on the field or only in commemoration of the battle cannot now be
determined. The English words are by Sir Walter Scott, and first
appeared in 1816:—

                  “Pibroch o’ Donuil Dhu,
                    Pibroch o’ Donuil,
                  Wake thy wild voice anew,
                    Summon Clan Conuil;
                  Come away, come away,
                    Hark to the summons,
                  Come in your war array,
                    Gentles and Commons.

                  Come from deep glen, and
                    From mountain so rocky,
                  The war pipe and pennon
                    Are at Inverlochy;
                  Come every hill plaid, and
                    True heart that wears one;
                  Come every steel blade, and
                    Strong hand that bears one;

                  Leave untended the herd, and
                    The flock without shelter,
                  The corpse uninterr’d,
                    The bride at the altar;
                  Leave the deer, leave the steer,
                    Leave nets and barges;
                  Come with your fighting gear,
                    Broadswords and targes.

                  Come as the winds come, when
                    Forests are rended;
                  Come as the waves come, when
                    Navies are stranded;
                  Faster come, faster come,
                    Faster and faster!
                  Chief, vassal, page, and groom!
                    Tenant and master!

                  Fast they come, fast they come;
                    See how they gather!
                  Wide waves the eagle plume
                    Blended with heather.
                  Cast your plaids, draw your blades,
                    Forward each man set!
                  Pibroch o’ Donuil Dhu,
                    Knell for the onset!”


                      “_IS FADA MAR SO THA SINN_,”

which may be translated “Too Long in this Condition,” is an old pibroch,
dating from about 1712. It was composed either by Donald _Mòr_ Mac
Crimmon or by Patrick, his son. Donald was compelled at one time,
because of some depredations of his own, to flee for his life into
Sutherlandshire. There he put up unrecognised at the house of a relative
named Mac Kay, who was getting married that day. Mac Crimmon sat down in
a corner almost unnoticed, but when the piper began to play he
unconsciously fingered his stick as if it were the chanter. The piper of
the evening noticed this, and asked him to play for them. Donald said he
could not, and the whole company asked him, and he again refused. At
last the piper said: “I am getting seven shillings and sixpence for
playing at this marriage. I’ll give you one-third if you will play.”
Donald then took up the pipe and began:—

              “Too long are we thus, too long are we thus,
              Too long in this condition,
              Too long lacking meat or drink,
              At Mac Kay’s marriage am I.”

These lines he repeated three times, and concluded by adding—

                    “At the house of Mac Kay am I.”

He played so well that all present knew him to be the great Donald _Mòr_
Mac Crimmon, and as he made his pipes speak to them they understood his
complaint, and he was then royally entertained.

The pibroch is also said to have been composed by Patrick _Mòr_ Mac
Crimmon on his being taken prisoner, along with many others, at the
battle of Worcester, and being left in a pitiable state. It is also
associated with the same piper and the battle of Sheriffmuir, where he
was left stripped of all his clothing, but it is impossible to say
which, if either, is right.

Want of hospitality towards a piper gave rise to another tune. It is
called

                 “THE MISERLY, MISERABLE ONE’S HOUSE,”

and its origin, as told to the late “Nether Lochaber” by an old Loch
Awe-side piper, was as follows:—

Some two or three hundred years ago, when the great Clan Campbell was at
the height of its power, the estate of Barbreck was owned by a Campbell,
who was brother or cousin or something of another Campbell, the
neighbouring laird of Craignish. Craignish kept a piper, but Barbreck
did not. Barbreck could afford to keep one, but he grudged the expense,
and his stinginess in this respect is commemorated in an Argyllshire
saying—“What I cannot afford I must do without, as Barbreck did without
a piper.”

Barbreck one day was on a visit to Craignish, and as he was leaving he
met the piper, and said to him—“The New Year is approaching. On New-
Year’s Day morning, when you have played the proper salute to my cousin,
your master, I wish you would come over to Barbreck and play a New-
Year’s salute to me, for, as you know, I have no piper of my own to do
it. Come and spend the day with us.” This the piper promised to do, and
on New Year’s Day morning, after first playing his master into good
humour, he went to Barbreck. He played and played until the laird was in
raptures, but the piper became hungry and thirsty, and hinted as much to
Barbreck. He got some food, but it was not satisfactory, either in
quantity or quality. The drinkables were no better, and long before the
sun set the piper was anxious to go home. “Give us one more tune before
you go,” said Barbreck. “That I will,” said the piper, and there and
then he struck up impromptu _Tigh Bhroinein_—the House of the Miserly
One. The following are some of the lines attached to the tune from the
very first, whether by the piper himself or by another is not known:—

            “I was in the house of the miserly one to-day,
            In the house of the miserly one was I;
            I went by invitation thither,
            But I got no sufficiency (of meat or drink).
            I got a drink of meal gruel there,
            And got bad barley scones;
            I got the leg of a hen there,
            And, by my troth, she was a poor and tough one.
            This is an invitation that has annoyed me,
            I will leave this to-night
            Without (I may say) food or drink
            I will leave thee, Barbreck;
            Nor will I return any more
            To play thee a piobaireachd salute.”

The translation is too literal to be poetry, but one can imagine how
Barbreck must have felt. He had better have done without that last tune.


                     “OH, THAT I HAD THREE HANDS!”

is associated with at least two incidents in Highland history. Towards
the end of the thirteenth century a dispute arose between _Mac Cailein
Mòr_, chief of the Clan Campbell, and Mac Dougall of Lorne, chief of the
Mac Dougalls, with reference to the boundaries of their estates. The
parties met at a spot where two streams unite, and fell to recrimination
and ultimately to fighting like tigers. The slaughter was terrible, and
the streams ran with blood and were crowded with the bodies of the
slain. Ultimately _Mac Cailein Mòr_ was killed, and his followers ceased
the fighting to carry off his body. Close to the battlefield there was a
small conical hillock—called in the Gaelic _Tom-a-Phiobair_, the Piper’s
Hillock—on the top of which the piper of the Campbells stood and played
while the battle raged. Sympathising with the Mac Dougalls, and
regretting the havoc made among them, he composed on the spot a pipe
tune, the purport of which was:—

   “My loss! my loss! that I have not three hands,
     Two engaged with the pipe and one with the sword,
   My loss! my loss! that I have not three hands,
     Two engaged with the pipe and one with the sword;
   My loss! my loss! low lies yonder
   Mac Dougall, with his pipe, whose sound was soft and sweet to me.”

This hardly indicates whether the piper would, had he three hands, have
fought with the Mac Dougalls against his own clan, but, at anyrate, the
Campbells, seeing that this was not one of their own tunes, were so
enraged that one of them ran to the piper and chopped off his head. It
is said that the piper’s fingers played three or four notes on the
chanter while his head was toppling to the ground.

This story belongs to the same class as those relating to the battles of
Philiphaugh and Bothwell Bridge, given in a previous chapter. The
resemblance, indeed, is too striking to be a coincidence, and the three
have probably at some time or other been one story. The other incident
connected by tradition with the tune is that already related of a cave
in either Skye or Mull, into which a venturesome piper entered. He never
returned, but the last wailing notes of his pipes told that he was being
hard beset with wolves, who threatened to tear him to pieces should he
stop playing. So he played mournfully:—

               “Oh, that I had three hands!
               Two for the pipes and one for the sword,”

the inference being that in that case he could have kept on playing and
fought the wolves at the same time.

The tune nearly always played at Highland funerals is

                          “LOCHABER NO MORE.”

It was composed to Jane, daughter of Sir Ewen Cameron of Lochiel, by a
young English officer on his being ordered back from the Highlands to
join his regiment. Jane Cameron was afterwards married to Lachlan Mac
Pherson of Cluny, thus bringing over the tune to the Mac Phersons. The
traditional account is entirely different. According to it a party of
marauders from Lochaber, consisting of forty to fifty men, reached, one
autumn afternoon, the summit of a hill immediately above Glenesk, the
most northerly parish of Forfarshire. They meant to make a raid on the
valley, but lay down to rest until after dusk. They were, however, seen
by some shepherds, who gave the alarm, and in the evening the
inhabitants of the glen were all under arms for the protection of their
property. After dusk the invaders descended, and in the battle that
ensued five of the defenders were killed and ten taken prisoners.
Prisoners and cattle were driven to the Highlands. The men returned next
year after a ransom of fifteen merks had been paid for each, but the
cattle were never seen again. A ballad giving these particulars was long
popular in the glen, but nothing now remains of it except the last words
of each verse—“Lochaber no more.” Allan Ramsay wrote lines for the air,
but they contain nothing of the spirit of the traditional origin. They
are obviously based on the historical account:—

           “Farewell to Lochaber, and farewell my Jean,
           Where heartsome with thee I’ve mony day been;
           For Lochaber no more, Lochaber no more,
           We’ll maybe return to Lochaber no more.
           Those tears that I shed, they’re a’ for my dear,
           And no for the dangers attending on weir,
           Tho’ borne on rough seas to a far, bloody shore,
           Maybe to return to Lochaber no more.

           Tho’ hurricanes arise and rise every wind,
           They’ll ne’er make a tempest like that in my mind;
           Tho’ loudest of thunder on loudest waves roar,
           That’s naething like leaving my love on the shore.
           To leave thee behind me my heart is sair pain’d,
           By ease that’s inglorious no fame can be gained;
           And beauty and love’s the reward of the brave,
           And I must deserve it before I can crave.

           Then glory, my Jeanie, maun plead my excuse;
           Since honour commands me, how can I refuse?
           Without it I ne’er can have merit for thee,
           And without thy favour I’d better not be.
           I gae, then, my lass, to win honour and fame,
           And if I should luck to come gloriously hame,
           I’ll bring thee a heart with love running o’er,
           And then I’ll leave thee and Lochaber no more.”

It is only fair to add that the tune, under another name, is said to
have been a favourite Irish air in London in the time of Queen
Elizabeth. If this was so, the explanation probably is that the Irish
who came to Scotland, and the Scots who went to Ireland, each carried
their music with them, and that there are many tunes common to both
peoples.


                “I HAVE HAD A KISS OF THE KING’S HAND.”

Pipers of old times always had “a guid conceit o’ themsel’s,” and
Patrick _Mòr_ Mac Crimmon, who flourished in 1660, was no exception to
the rule. His master, Roderick Mac Leod of Mac Leod, went to London
after the Restoration to pay his homage to Charles II., and was very
warmly received. He had taken his piper with him, and the King was so
pleased with his fine appearance and his music that he allowed Mac
Crimmon to kiss his hand. Patrick was highly elated over this, and
commemorated the honour that had been paid him by composing the tune
_Fhŭair mi pòg o laimh an Righ_, which, to those acquainted with the
language and music, seems to speak forth the pride and gratitude of the
performer, the words expressed by the opening measure being:—

                 “I have had a kiss, a kiss, a kiss,
                 I have had a kiss of the King’s hand;
                 No one who blew in a sheep’s skin
                 Has received such honour as I have.”


                          “RORY MOR’S LAMENT.”

Sir Roderick Mac Leod of Dunvegan, who died somewhere about 1630, was a
man of noble spirit, celebrated for great military prowess and resource.
His hospitality was unbounded, and he was in all respects entitled to be
called _Mòr_ or great, in all the qualities that went to constitute a
great Highland chief and leader of men. The Gaelic bards were
enthusiastic in his praises, and his piper, Patrick _Mòr_ Mac Crimmon—
the same Mac Crimmon presumably—taking his death very much to heart,
could not live at Dunvegan afterwards. Shouldering his great pipe, he
made for his own house at Boreraig, composing and playing as he went
_Cumha Ruaraidh Mhoir_ (Rory _Mòr’s_ Lament), which is considered the
most melodious, feeling, and melancholy lament known. The following are
some of the words, translated by “Fionn”:—

                “Give me my pipes, I’ll home them carry,
                In these sad halls I dare not tarry,
                My pipes hand o’er, my heart is sore,
                For Rory Mor, my Rory Mor.

                Fetch me my pipes, my heart is breaking,
                For Rory Mor his rest is taking,
                He walks no more, and to its core
                My heart is sore for Rory Mor.

                Give me my pipes, I’m sad and weary,
                These halls are silent, dark, and eerie,
                The pipe no more cheers as of yore,
                Thy race is o’er, brave Rory Mor.”


                      “THE CLAN FARLANE PIBROCH.”

A Faust-like story is told of Andrew, chief of the Clan Mac Farlane, and
the supposed composer of the “Clan Farlane Pibroch.” Andrew and
Alastair, chiefs of the Mac Donells of Keppoch, were credited with
having “the black art.” They were said to have sold their souls to the
devil in exchange for their supernatural powers. They seem to have
driven a rather peculiar bargain, for the understanding was that the
devil should get only one of their souls, the chiefs to decide between
themselves which it would be. The appointed day and hour came on which
the debt was to be paid, and still the chiefs, though they had come to
the trysting place, had not decided which soul was to be given up. When
the devil came he was in a desperate hurry, and at once exclaimed,
“Well, and whose soul do I get?” On the spur of the moment Mac Donell
pointed to Mac Farlane’s shadow, saying, “That’s he,” whereupon the
devil snatched up the shadow and ran off with it. From that day Mac
Farlane was never known to cast a shadow.

As to the tune itself, Sir Walter Scott supposes it had a close
connection with the predatory excursions of the clan into the low
country near the fastnesses on the western side of Loch Lomond. The
pibroch, _Thogail nam bo_, seems to indicate such practices, the sense
of the music being:—

               “We are bound to drive the bullocks,
               All by hollows, hirsts, and hillocks,
                 Through the sleet and through the rain;
               When the moon is beaming low
               On frozen lake and hill of snow,
               Boldly, heartily we go,
                 And all for little gain.”

The tune was almost lost, but about 1894 some enthusiasts gathered it
from several who knew it, and committed it to paper, thus ensuring its
preservation. The credit of this laudable effort, it should be added, is
mainly due to Provost Mac Farlane of Dumbarton, who, with the help of
Pipe-major J. Mac Dougall Gillies, Glasgow, had the complete tune taken
down from the playing of John Leitch, an old man who lived in
Glendaruel. The Faust-like story of its composer is also told of a
Donald Mac Kay of Lord Reay’s country, but not in connection with a
tune.


                    “JOHN GARBH OF RAASAY’S LAMENT.”

Connected with “John Garbh of Raasay’s Lament,” one of the most famous
of pibrochs, and a favourite with most pipers to this day, there are
stories of pipers, poetry, and superstition. John Garbh Mac Leod of
Raasay met his death about 1650 at the early age of 21. He was a man of
fine appearance and great strength. He had been to Lewis on a visit to a
friend, and when he was returning home to Skye the day was so stormy
that his crew were very unwilling to put to sea, being afraid they would
lose their lives. Raasay thereupon exclaimed to the boatman in the
Gaelic:—“Son of fair Muireil, are you afraid?” and the man at once threw
his fears aside, and with the reply—“No, no, Raasay, we shall share the
same fate to-day,” began to prepare for the voyage. All went well until
off Trotternish, the people of which anxiously watched the boat. The
wind increased still more, and a heavy shower hid the vessel from their
sight. When it cleared off the boat was nowhere to be seen. Mac Leod’s
untimely fate was deeply mourned, and Patrick _Mòr_ Mac Crimmon
commemorated the sad event by composing the famous and pathetic pibroch.
A celebrated Skye poetess also composed a touching lament, and a sister
of Mac Crimmon’s composed an elegy, the English of which goes as
follows:—

                    “Sitting idly I sorrow,
                      Heavy hearted and ailing;
                    I am songless and cheerless,
                      I am weary and wailing.

                    Since the day of my sorrow
                      I am weary with wailing,
                    Since the loss of the boatie
                      Where the hero was sailing.

                    Since the loss of the boatie,
                      Where the hero was sailing;
                    Oh, strong was his shoulder,
                      Though the sea was prevailing.

                    Oh, strong was his shoulder,
                      Though the sea was prevailing;
                    Now he lies in the clachan
                      Whom I am bewailing.

                    Now he lies in the clachan
                      Whom I am bewailing,
                    And a green grassy curtain
                      His cold bed is veiling.

                    And a green grassy curtain
                      His cold bed is veiling.
                    His sword in its scabbard
                      The rust is assailing.

                    His sword in its scabbard
                      The rust is assailing;
                    His hounds on their leashes
                      Their speed unavailing.

                    His hounds on their leashes
                      Their speed unavailing;
                    No more shall my hero
                      His mountains be scaling.

                    No more shall my hero
                      His mountains be scaling;
                    Sitting sadly I sorrow,
                      Heavy hearted and ailing.”

Tradition says that John Garbh of Raasay was drowned through the
machinations of a witch. She bore him a grudge, and while the boat was
at sea she sat in her hut rocking a basin of milk in which there was a
clam shell to represent the boat. When she sank the clam shell the boat
sank, the story being that a crow alighted on the gunwale, and that Mac
Leod, in trying to kill it with his sword, cut the boat to the waters’
edge. There are several improbable things about this tradition, not the
least obvious of which is the impossibility of knowing how the boat sank
when no one was left to tell the tale. However, it is a tradition—that
much at least is true.

[Illustration]




                             CHAPTER XXIII.
                      SOME WELL-KNOWN GATHERINGS.

         “Ye voices of Cona, of high swelling power,
         Ye bards who can sing of her olden time,
         On whose spirits arise the blue panoplied throng
         Of her ancient hosts, who are mighty and strong,
                     My bards raise the song.”
                                                     —_Ossian._

  A Tune with four stories—The Carles wi’ the Breeks—The Mac Gregor’s
    Gathering—Scott’s verses—_Caber Feidh_—The Camerons’ Gathering—Well-
    matched chiefs—The Loch of the Sword.


The first tune to be noticed in this chapter is peculiar in this
respect, that whereas to many are ascribed two origins, to this there
are ascribed three or four. More than one cannot possibly be correct,
unless we conclude that different pipers at different times in different
places and without any co-operation, composed the same tune. That is
rather too much, however, but we will give the stories as they are to be
found in many books of Highland history and tradition.

In the first place, then, this tune has three names. It is known as

                      “THE BREADALBANE GATHERING”

(or March), “Wives of this Glen,” and _Bodaich nam Briogais_ (“The
Carles wi’ the Breeks”), and each name applies to the air as it is
associated with a certain district of Scotland. As “Lord Breadalbane’s
March” it is noticed in an old hymn-book by _Iain Bàn Caimbeul_, first
published in 1786, and afterwards in 1834. This book associated it with
Coll Kitto, mentioned in a previous chapter, and gives a long story of
raiding and plundering in which this worthy was engaged about 1644. At
one stage in the exploits, when his enemies were fleeing, the Baronet of
Lochawe ordered his piper to compose a march tune suitable for the
occasion, and to keep playing all night. This the piper did, and his
tune was _Bodaich nam Briogais_. There is certainly an air of
authenticity about the story, and the details bear the stamp of
probability if not of truth.

As the “Breadalbane Gathering” it is a Perthshire tune, and well known.
The story is that it was played in 1762 at a battle in Caithness, in
which the first Earl of Breadalbane was victor, but the air belonged to
an earlier period, for _Seumas-an-Tuim_, the reiver referred to in the
melody flourished at the beginning of the century:—

            “Ye women of the glen
            Ye women of the glen
            Ye women of the glen
            Ye women of the glen
            Is it not time for you to arise?
            And _Seumas-an-Tuim_ driving away your cattle.”

The tune, then, although Breadalbane’s raid into Caithness may have
given it a new lease of life, under a new name, must have been in
existence before that time. The raid itself, for that matter, is
somewhat mythical, and the chances are that this is only a bowdlerised
version of the next story, which is thoroughly authenticated.

It is as “The Carles with the Breeks” that the tune really hails from
Caithness. Sir John Campbell of Glenorchy received in 1672 from George
Earl of Caithness an assignment of all his lands and possessions on
condition that he would take the name of Sinclair. Glenorchy agreed to
this, and on the death of the Earl in 1676 he took the title. His right
was, however, disputed by the heir male, George Sinclair of Kiess, and
Sir John went to Caithness with a force of Campbells, and defeated the
Sinclairs at Altimarlach, a spot on the banks of the Water of Wick, and
a short distance from the county town. The Campbells, a Highland clan,
of course wore the kilt, and like all true Highlanders—of that age—they
despised those who did not. The Sinclairs, never a Highland clan, but
only a county family at best, wore the trews, and when Findlay Mac Ivor,
Glenorchy’s piper, saw them wavering, he poured forth the voluntary:—

        “The carles with the breeks, the carles with the breeks,
        The carles with the breeks are flying before us.”

And to experts in pipe music the tune does appear to articulate very
plainly the sentiments of _Bodaich nam Briogais_. Another set of words,
given in the Killin collection of Gaelic song, seems more like a defying
challenge to the Sinclairs than a song of victory:—

   “Your cattle lifted are, lifted are, lifted are,
   Your cattle lifted are, your men sadly slain are.
   I’m Black John the sharp-eyed one, sharp-eyed one, sharp-eyed one,
   I’m Black John the sharp-eyed one, driving them safely.

       Carles in trewses clad, trewses clad, trewses clad,
       Carles in trewses clad, up and bestir you.
       Carles in trewses clad, side dirk and mailed shirt,
       Carles in trewses clad, flight we quick gave you.

   Glenorchy’s bold Mac Intyres, true shots that will not miss,
   Bullets sure hitting that fast slay the carles.
   There where the river bends, arrows that pierced you quick;
   Many’s the house-head that rests without waking.

       Carles in trewses clad, etc.

   We made that morning start, morning start, morning start,
   We made that morning start, when watching failed you.
   Wives, mothers, in this glen, in this glen, in this glen,
   Wives, mothers, in this glen, it’s time you were waking.

       Carles in trewses clad, etc.”

Glenorchy, however, did not obtain a very firm hold in the county, and
the Sinclairs held the great bulk of the lands until within the lifetime
of the present generation, when it seems to be drifting into other hands
because of the want of heirs male in the direct line. Neither did the
contempt expressed by the piper do much to make the trews unpopular, for
the late Caithness Fencibles, raised and commanded by Sir John Sinclair,
were dressed pretty much as were their ancestors at Altimarlach.
Caithness, of course, was, and still is, not very Highland, except in
the matter of latitude, and it is very noticeable that the only pipe
tune associated with the county was played by a Perthshire piper on a
warlike excursion, fighting against the natives. Caithness has no pipe
music of its own.

Again, the tune is known in Argyllshire as “Wives of this Glen.”
Tradition says it was played by Breadalbane’s piper just previous to the
massacre of Glencoe, in 1692, in the hope of warning the Mac Ians of
their danger, and that one Mac Ian wife heeded the warning and fled to
the hills with her child, saving his life. Glencoe is one of the wildest
places in the Highlands, gloomy and desolate, ten miles from any other
inhabited district, and through it the Cona, a wild, rugged stream, on
the banks of which Ossian is believed to have first seen the light,
tumbles its way to the sea. Towards the north-west end the terrible
tragedy, which left an ineradicable stain on Scottish history, took
place, and there the piper is supposed to have stood when he played:—

          “Wives of wild Cona glen, Cona glen, Cona glen,
            Wives of wild Cona glen, wake from your slumbers,
          Early I woke this morn, early I woke this morn,
            Woke to alarm you with music’s wild numbers.
          Slain is the cattle boy, cattle boy, cattle boy,
            Slain is the cow-boy while you soundly slumbered;
          Lifted your cattle are, lifted your cattle are,
            Slain are your herdsmen, by foemen outnumbered.
          _Iain du Beeroch du, Beeroch du, Beeroch du,
            Iain du Beeroch du_ is off with the plunder.
          Wives of wild Cona glen, Cona glen, Cona glen,
            Wives of wild Cona glen, wake from your slumbers.”

_Iain du Beeroch du_ was a noted Highland cattle-lifter, and corresponds
to _Seumas-an-Tuim_, of the Perthshire origin of the tune. Probably they
were one and the same person under different names. The only theory on
which the three stories can be reconciled is that the tune originally
belonged to Perthshire, but was taken to Caithness and to Argyllshire by
different pipers, accepted in each place as new, and given a new name.
In those days, when communication between districts of Scotland which
had nothing in common was very restricted, the tune could exist in one
county as new for many years without the people knowing that it was
familiar to those of another. And naturally they continued to associate
with it the circumstances in which they themselves first heard it. It
was this tune, by the way, that on the morning of Quatre Bras, was
played through the streets of Brussels to wake the slumbering
Highlanders.


                     “THE MAC GREGORS’ GATHERING.”

Although the Clan Mac Gregor was one of the most famous in Highland
history, there is not very much even of reliable tradition concerning
the music of the clan. There is—or, at least, was—enough of tradition;
but as it does not seem to have been committed to paper, it is now
probably lost. Of the origin of “The Mac Gregors’ Gathering” we know
nothing beyond the fact that it was included in Captain Mac Leod of
Gesto’s manuscript book of pibrochs as having been taken down in pipers’
language, that “syllabic jargon of illiterate pipers” referred to at
length in a former article, from the performers, most likely from the
Mac Crimmons. From the Gesto book it was translated in 1815 into
ordinary notation by Alexander Campbell, editor of _Albyn’s Anthology_,
and this gave it a place in published pipe music. The notation of
Captain Mac Leod, says Mr. Campbell, he found, to his astonishment, to
coincide exactly with regular notation, so it cannot have been such
jargon after all. Scott thoroughly caught the spirit of his tune in the
song:—

      “The moon’s on the lake, and the mist’s on the brae,
      And the Clan has a name that is nameless by day!
            Then gather, gather, gather, Gregalich!
            Gather, gather, gather, etc.

      Our signal for fight, that from monarchs we drew,
      Must be heard but by night in our vengeful haloo!
            Then haloo, Gregalich! haloo, Gregalich!
            Haloo, haloo, haloo, Gregalich, etc.

      Glen Orchy’s proud mountains, Caolchuirn and her towers,
      Glen Strae and Glen Lyon no longer are ours;
            We’re landless, landless, landless, Gregalich!
            Landless, landless, landless, etc.

      But doom’d and devoted by vassal and lord,
      Mac Gregor has still both his heart and his sword!
            Then courage, courage, courage, Gregalich;
            Courage, courage, courage, etc.

      If they rob us of name and pursue us with beagles,
      Give their roofs to the flame and their flesh to the eagles!
            Then vengeance, vengeance, vengeance, Gregalich!
            Vengeance, vengeance, vengeance, etc.

      While there’s leaves in the forest, and foam on the river,
      Mac Gregor, despite them, shall flourish for ever!
            Come then, Gregalich; come then, Gregalich;
            Come then, come then, come then, etc.

      Through the depths of Loch Katrine the steed shall career,
      O’er the peaks of Ben Lomond the galley shall steer,
      And the rocks of Craig Royston like icicles melt,
      Ere our wrongs be forgot or our vengeance unfelt.

            Then gather, gather, gather, Gregalich!
            Gather, gather, gather, etc.”


                            “_CABER FEIDH._”

One of the most stirring of pipe tunes is _Caber Feidh_, composed by
Norman Mac Leod, a native of Assynt, Sutherlandshire. The Earl of
Sutherland gave a commission to William Munroe, of Achany, who, with a
large body of retainers, descended on Assynt and carried off much
plunder. His excursion was in the latter end of summer, when the cattle
were grazing in distant pastures, and Achany plundered the sheilings and
stole a considerable amount of butter and cheese. Indignant at this, Mac
Leod composed the tune and song which became the clan song of the Mac
Kenzies. He made it the vehicle of invective and bitter sarcasm against
the Sutherlands and Munroes. The “victims” were very sore about the
production, and Munroe threatened the bard’s life if they should meet.
They were personally unacquainted, but they did meet in Ardgay Inn. Mac
Leod was enjoying bread and butter and cheese and ale, and he knew
Munroe by the colour of his bonnet, which was always grey, though Munroe
did not know him. Mac Leod drank to Munroe with great promptitude, and
then offered him the horn, remarking in Gaelic:—

                 “Bread and butter and cheese to me
                 Ere death my mouth shall close,
                 And, traveller, there’s drink for thee
                 To please the black Munroes.”

Achany was pleased, drank the ale, and when he had discovered who the
courteous stranger was he forgave him _Caber Feidh_, and ever after they
were good friends. Years later the poet’s young son, Angus, then a
licentiate, waited on Achany relative to the filling up of a vacancy in
Rogart Parish Church. “And so you really think,” said Munroe, “I would
use my influence to get a living for your father’s son. _Caber Feidh’s_
not forgotten yet.” “No, and never will,” replied Mac Leod, “but if I
get the parish of Rogart I promise you it will never be sung or
recommended from the pulpit there.” “Thank you,” said Achany, “that is
one important point gained. You are not so bad as your father after all,
and we must try and get the place for you.” And he gave young Mac Leod a
letter to Dunrobin which got him the living.


                       “THE CAMERONS’ GATHERING.”

There is a good story associated with “The Camerons’ Gathering:”—In the
seventeenth century a dispute arose between Sir Ewen Cameron of Lochiel
and the Earl of Atholl about their respective rights to grazing on lands
on the borders of Rannoch. The two chiefs met at Perth, and it was
agreed that the dispute should be settled amicably at a meeting on the
ground in question. On the appointed day Lochiel started early,
accompanied by a single henchman and his piper, Donald Breac of
Muirshiorlaich. On the way, however, he met an old woman—Gorm’uil Mhor
of Moy—who warned him emphatically not to proceed further without more
attendants:—“Go back, Ewen of Lochiel, go back! Take along with thee
three score and five of the best men of thy name and clan. If their aid
is required it is well to have them to appeal to, if not, so much the
better. It is Gorm’uil of Moy that advises it; it is Gorm’uil of Moy, if
needs be, that commands it.” Lochiel went back and chose three score and
five picked clansmen whom he took with him. Before meeting Atholl he
concealed his men in a hollow within a few hundred yards of the
trysting-place, and arranged with them that until they saw him turn his
cloak, which was dark grey on one side and bright red on the other, they
were to lie still. Whenever he turned his cloak it was a sign to them
that Atholl was treacherous, and they were to come to their chiefs
assistance.

At noon the chiefs met, and after discussion they found that neither was
disposed to yield his claims. The Earl at last threatened Lochiel, and
at a signal fifty Atholl men sprang from a copse near by and awaited
orders.

“Who are these, my lord?” demanded Lochiel.

“These,” replied the Earl of Atholl, with a smile, “are only a few of
the Atholl hoggets come across the hills with me to eat and grow fat on
their own grazings.”

Lochiel in the meantime had turned his cloak scarlet side out, and at
the signal his three-score-and-five men rushed into view.

“And who are these, Lochiel?” said Atholl, rather taken aback.

“These, my lord,” said Cameron, “are a few of my Lochaber hounds, sharp-
toothed and hungry, and oh! so keen to taste the flesh of your Atholl
hoggets.”

The Camerons were nearer than the Atholl men, and could have made the
Earl a prisoner before his own men could prevent them. So he gave in as
gracefully as possible, and, drawing his sword and kissing it, he
renounced there and then all claim to the grazings; and, in proof of his
faith in Lochiel, he tossed the sword into the loch near by. The loch
since then has been called the “Loch of the Sword.”

Lochiel’s piper meanwhile had been deeply interested in the scene, and
the idea of the Lochaber dogs tearing the Atholl sheep inspired him to a
new melody. Accordingly, he struck up and played for the first time
_Cruinneachadh nan Camaronach_, “The Camerons’ Gathering.”

               “Ye sons of dogs, of dogs the breed,
               Come quick, come here, on flesh to feed.”

The tune is considered one of the best pieces of pipe music extant; and,
in corroboration of the story, it is said that in 1826 a herd-boy fished
out of the loch, then almost empty, a basket-hilted sword, but the men
of Lochaber coming to hear of it, asked that it should again be
deposited in its place, as it was a token and pledge of a very solemn
transaction. So with due formality the sword was again thrown into the
loch, the bard of the party repeating a Gaelic rhyme, which has been
translated:—

               “The sword we’ve cast into the lake;
                 Bear witness all the knolls around,
               Ours to the furthest stretch of time
                 Are hill and stream and pasture ground.”

This story, on almost similar lines, is told of two other Highland
chiefs, but in that case there is no pipe tune connected with it, and it
is as the origin of “The Camerons’ Gathering” that it is most generally
accepted.




                             CHAPTER XXIV.
                       MORE STORIES AND A MORAL.

            “Pipe of the simple peasant—still
              Through Caledonia’s proud domains,
            Thou cheer’st the rustic cottage hearth
              With thy enlivening strains.

            “And in the far, far distant west,
              Where deep and pathless forests lower,
            Thou sooth’st the drooping exile’s breast
              Through many a lonely hour.”
                                            —_J. T. Calder._

  The Clan Stewart March—Mac Gregor of Ruaro—The Braes of the Mist—
    Episode at a Dunvegan competition—A Mac Crimmon surpassed—Mac
    Pherson’s Lament—Burns and the story—Rob Roy’s lament—The Mac
    Lachlans’ March—_Gille Calum_—The Reel o’ Tulloch—The Periwig Reel—
    Jenny Dang the Weaver—Mac Donald’s salute—Mac Leod’s Salute—
    Disappearing lore—Something to be done.


The Royal House of Stuart should perhaps have been mentioned earlier,
but, like other names famous in history, they did not leave much to
posterity in the way of music or poetry. Enough has been composed and
written about them, but that is another matter.


                      “THE MARCH OF CLAN STEWART”

is known in Perthshire as the “Sherramuir March,” because it was played
at that battle by the pipers of the clan. According to tradition this
tune was played both when the clan were marching to battle and in honour
of a victory. It was played at Pinkie, Inverlochy, Sheriffmuir, and
Prestonpans, and it was all along recognised as a tune peculiarly
pertaining to the Stewarts. In accordance with Highland custom, the
clansmen were in the habit of marching in the intervals of pipe music to
improvised singing, and when or how the present words emerged from all
previous improvisations and became a song it is impossible to say. At
the battle of Pinkie in September, 1547, the clan was commanded by
Donald Stewart, of Invernayle, the real chief being an old man. On the
march homeward in October, when passing through Menteith, the clan found
prepared at the house of one of the tenants a marriage dinner, at which
the Earl of Menteith was to be present. Being hungry, Donald and his
followers ate up the feast, and when Menteith arrived he was very angry,
and instantly pursued the Stewarts. On overtaking them one of his men
taunted them thus:—

           “Yellow-haired Stewarts of smartest deeds,
           Who could grab at the kail in your sorest needs,”

to which Stewart replied:—

          “If smartness in deeds is ours by descent,
          Then I draw, and to pierce you this arrow is sent,”

and he shot the man who had taunted his clan. A conflict ensued, in
which the Earl and many of his men were killed, and then the Stewarts
went off in triumph, their pipers playing the Stewarts’ March. The words
now in use are the composition of an _Iain Breac Mac Eanric_
(Henderson), a celebrated piper of the time of Montrose, and a resident
in the Glencoe district. There would probably be older words, but those
here given are those now associated with the tune:—

                “The heath-clad Ben we’ll soon ascend,
                Through Glen Laoigh we’ll soon descend,
                Our points of steel we’ll swiftly send
                  Thro’ every loon that bars us.

                      We will up and march away,
                      We will up and march away,
                      We will up and march away,
                      Daring let of all men.

                “O’er the hills we’ll speed along,
                Thro’ Glencoe the march prolong;
                Our King the burden of our song,
                  Asking leave of no man.

                      We will up, etc.

                “To Glengarry and Lochiel,
                Ever with us true and leal,
                Keppoch, too, who seeks our weal,
                  Is there in spite of all men.

                      We will up, etc.

                “Mac Phersons come, in deeds not small;
                Mac Kenzies also at our call;
                Whose battle frenzy will appal
                  And fill our foes with awe then.

                      We will up, etc.

                “Mac Gregors fierce when man to man,
                Join with the Royal Stuart clan;
                Blow up the pipes, march in the van,
                  Daring let of all men.

                      We will up, etc.”

The chorus is sung before the first verse, as well as after each.
“Daring let of all men” means “Defying the hindrance of all men.”

One of the most tragic of stories is associated with another Clan Mac
Gregor air—

                         “MAC GREGOR OF RUARO.”

The clan, as is well known, were terribly persecuted by the ruling
powers. When, after the ’45, most of the other Highland chiefs accepted
Crown charters for their lands, the Mac Gregors refused, their clansmen
backing them vigorously in their attitude. For this independence of
theirs they were hunted like wild beasts, pursued by bloodhounds, and
executed whenever caught. Even so early as 1603 the clan found
themselves so persecuted and hemmed in that their chief, Mac Gregor of
Glenstrae, considered it necessary to deliver himself and a score of his
principal men to the Government, under promise of being allowed to leave
the country. This promise was given, but ruthlessly broken, for they
were all hanged at Edinburgh. In the group was Gregor Mac Gregor of
Ruaro, the subject of the lament and the song. The author of neither is
known:—

                  “There is sorrow, deep sorrow,
                    Heavy sorrow down-weighs me;
                  Sorrow deep, dark, and lonesome,
                    Whence nothing can raise me.

                  Yes, my heart’s filled with sorrow,
                    Deep sorrow undying,
                  For Mac Gregor of Ruaro,
                    Whose home was Glenlyon.

                  For the bannered Mac Gregor,
                    So bravely who bore him,
                  With the roar of the war pipe
                    Loud thundering before him.

                  His emblem the pine tree
                    On mountain side swinging;
                  His trim-tapered arrows
                    The true bird was winging.”

And so on in very much the same strain for other nine verses.

There is another tune of the “Children of the Mist,” as the Clan Mac
Gregor were known, that deserves mention. It is a wild and melancholy
pibroch, called _Cruachan a’ Cheathaich_, or

                        “THE BRAES OF THE MIST.”

To it is sung a ballad, and connected with the air and song there is an
interesting story. The singer, a Mac Gregor, concealed in her house her
husband and two sons when some bitter enemies of the clan were
approaching. There was no time for escape, and so she hid her friends in
a bed, and, sitting down by the fire, proceeded to sing:—

       “I sit here alone by the plain of the highway,
       For my poor hunted kin, watching mist, watching byeway;
       I’ve got no sign that they’re near to my dwelling;
       At Loch Fyne they were last seen—if true be that telling.”

And so on, representing herself as waiting in solitude for her
persecuted kindred, and saying that as they had not returned they must
either be at Loch Fyne—as when she last heard of them—or far away in the
glens of the mist, hunting and fishing, and compelled to pass the night
in some poor hut, where she had previously left some things for them.
After a prayer for their safety—

    “May the King of the Universe save you for ever
    From the flash of the bullet and the store of the quiver,
    From the keen-pointed knife, with the life-blood oft streaming,
    From the edge of the sharp claymore, terribly gleaming,”

she concluded with expressions of her own sadness on account of their
dangers. The enemies stopped outside her cottage and listened to the
song, and believing it to be from the singer’s heart—as it was, but not
in the way they supposed—they passed on without disturbing her, and her
husband and sons were saved.

The Gaelic proverb, “The apprentice surpasses his master,” or

              “THE APPRENTICE SURPASSES THE MAC CRIMMON,”

is associated with two tunes. There was to be a piping competition at
Dunvegan at which pipers from all parts of the country were to be
present. The leading Mac Crimmon of the day, the head of the college—
“Professor” he would now be called—and a nephew of his had “entered,”—if
that formality was necessary in these days—and Mac Crimmon had taught
his nephew all he himself knew, with the exception of one tune, which he
hoped would give him the lead in the competition. The two of them, man
and boy, on their way to Dunvegan, slept one night at a wayside inn,
sharing a bed. When the old man slept he dreamed of the morrow, and in
his dreams he seized the boy’s arm and fingered on it the notes of the
special tune he had reserved for himself. The youth was smart enough to
realise that this meant something, and also smart enough to commit the
notes to memory as his uncle fingered them on his arm. When the
competition began he stepped out first and immediately played his
uncle’s tune, and carried off the principal honours of the day. Then,
the story goes, the people began to speak of _An gille ‘toirt bàrr air
Mac Crimmon_—the lad that surpasses the Mac Crimmon.

But it is the other version of the story that is connected with the
origin of a pipe tune. One of the Mac Crimmons, well known as _Padruig
Caogach_ or “Winking Peter,” owing to his inveterate habit of winking
while playing, once endeavoured to compose a new pipe tune. He managed
two measures, which in time became very popular, but he could not for
the life of him complete it. Two years elapsed, and still _Padruig’s_
muse had failed to come to his assistance, and the fragment began to be
called _Am port leathach_—the half-completed tune. Then a young piper—
_Iain Dall_ it was—inspired with the music of the tune, set himself to
complete it, naming it _Lasan Phadruig Chaogaich_, and renouncing all
share in the honours of authorship. But _Padruig_ did not like being
outstripped in this way by Mac Kay, who was but a beardless boy, and, in
his anger, he persuaded the other students at the college to make away
with his rival. He succeeded the better in his scheme that Mac Kay had
previously given great offence to his classmates by his proficiency, of
which they were jealous, and with which the master piper taunted them.
So one day as they were all walking together at _Dun Bhorraraig_, they
came to a rock twenty-four feet in height, over which they pushed the
blind “apprentice.” But he alighted on his feet without sustaining much
injury, and the spot over which he was thrown was known for a long time
after as _Leum an doill_—the leap of the blind. _Iain Dall_ ultimately
returned to Gairloch and succeeded his father as family piper to the Mac
Kenzies of Gairloch, dying at the age of ninety-eight.


                         “MAC PHERSON’S LAMENT”

will always be associated with Burns’s song and with the noted Highland
freebooter who in 1700, after holding the counties of Aberdeen, Banff,
and Moray in fear for a long time, was captured, tried before the
Sheriff of Banffshire, along with certain gipsies taken in his company,
and executed on the Gallow Hill of Banff. But it is not generally known
that Burns’s words can hardly be called original. As a matter of fact,
Mac Pherson himself, tradition says, composed both the pibroch and a set
of words wonderfully like those afterwards composed by Burns. The
pibroch he composed long before his capture, and the words he gave to
the world when he was executed, under the name of “Mac Pherson’s
Farewell.” Here they are:—

               “My father was a gentleman
                 Of fame and lineage high,
               Oh! mother, would you ne’er had born
                 A wretch so doomed as I!
                     But dantonly and wantonly
                       And rantonly I’ll gae,
                     I’ll play a tune and dance it roun’
                       Below the gallows tree.

               The Laird o’ Grant, with power aboon
                 The royal majesty,
               He pled fu’ well for Peter Brown,
                 But let Mac Pherson die.
                     But dantonly, etc.

               But Braco Duff, in rage enough,
                 He first laid hands on me;
               If death did not arrest my course,
                 Avenged I should be.
                     But dantonly, etc.

               I’ve led a life o’ meikle strife,
                 Sweet peace ne’er smiled on me,
               It grieves me sair that I maun gae
                  An’ nae avenged be.
                     But dantonly, etc.”

Burns, on his tour through the Highlands, probably learned the air and
the tradition of how Mac Pherson, when in prison under sentence of
death, wrote the song, sang and played it on the scaffold, and concluded
by breaking his violin to pieces because no one would accept it as a
present, and promise to play the tune over his body after his execution.
Neither the old version nor the words of Burns have much of the ring of
a lament about them, but both are in accordance with the notorious
character of the man. Burns, by the way, perpetrates a rather curious
Irishism in first saying Mac Pherson

                  “Played a spring and danc’d it round
                    Below the gallows tree;”

and immediately afterwards making him say—

                  “Untie these bands from off my hands
                    And bring to me my sword.”

How a man could play a spring and dance it round while his hands were
tied, he does not take the trouble to explain.


                          “ROB ROY’S LAMENT.”

Rob Roy himself, the most celebrated of all the clan who had “a name
that was nameless by day,” had a lament specially composed by his wife,
Helen Mac Gregor, on an occasion when the family were compelled by the
law to leave their fastnesses and take refuge in Argyllshire. Helen was
a woman of fierce and haughty disposition, and, feeling extreme anguish
at being expelled from the banks of Loch Lomond, she gave vent to her
feelings in a fine piece of music, still known as “Rob Roy’s Lament.” “I
was once so hard put at,” Scott makes Rob say, “by my great enemy, as I
may well ca’ him, that I was forced e’en to gie way to the tide and
remove myself and my people and my family from our native land, and to
withdraw for a time into _Mac Cailein Mòr’s_ country—and Helen made a
Lament on our departure, as well as Mac Crimmon himself could hae framed
it—and so piteously sad and waesome that our hearts amaist broke as we
sat and listened to her—it was like the wailing of one that mourns for
the mother that bore him—the tears came down the rough faces of our
gillies as they hearkened—and I would not have the same touch of
heartbreak again, no, not for all the lands that ever were owned by Mac
Gregor.”


                       “THE MAC LACHLANS’ MARCH.”

A touch of the romantic is found in the story of _Moladh Mairi_, a well-
known Mac Lachlan tune. Angus Mac Kay, son of _Iain Dall_, the blind
piper of Gairloch, attended a competition in Edinburgh on one occasion,
and the other competitors were so jealous of him and afraid of his
superior talents that they conspired together to destroy his chances,
They obtained possession of his pipes and pierced the bag in several
places. When Mac Kay began to practise on the day of the competition he
discovered the injury, and was in despair. But he had a fair friend of
the name of Mary who quickly procured for him a sheep’s skin, from
which, undressed as it was, they between them formed a new bag. With
this the piper carried off the first prize, and in gratitude to his
helper Mac Kay composed _Moladh Mairi_. He afterwards married a Mary
Fraser of Gairloch, but we have nothing to show that this was the same
Mary. In a proper story it certainly would have been.

Another, and a more probable, story is associated with this tune. A
daughter of Mac Lachlan of Strathlachlan, chief of the clan, made a
present of a wether’s skin to the family piper to make a bag for his
pipes. He was delighted with the present, and composed the tune in her
honour. This story is the more likely, inasmuch as it is well known that
pipers always had a high sense of honour, as they still have, and would
never think of treating a competitor in the way the first story says Mac
Kay was treated.

                            “_GILLE CALUM_,”

or “The Sword Dance,” is one of the best known of pipe tunes. There is
the jocular story to the effect that it made its first appearance in the
world after the Deluge, when the Ark had landed on Ararat, and Noah
expressed his joy by dancing over two crossed twigs. That the tune, or
at anyrate the dance, is an heirloom from the ancients, is highly
probable, as the sword dance in a modified form was the special antic of
the priests of Mars. The real _Gille Calum_, however, is said to have
been _Callum a’ chinn mhoir_—Malcolm Canmore, who incurred the
displeasure of the Highlanders by removing the ancient Court from
Dunstaffnage Castle, in Argyllshire, to Dunfermline, by marrying the
Saxon Princess Margaret, which led to the change of Court language from
Gaelic to English, and also by having added to the coinage a very small
coin, the bodle, equal in value to one-third of our halfpenny, and so
small as to be contemptible in the eyes of his Highland subjects. The
translation, by “Fionn,” of the Gaelic associated with the name shows
considerable wit and a pretty strain of sarcasm:—

                     “Gillie-Callum, twa pennies,
                     Gillie-Callum, twa pennies,
                     Twa pennies, twa pennies,
                       Gillie Callum, ae bawbee.

                 I can get a lass for naething,
                 I can get a lass for naething,
                 Lass for naething, lass for naething,
                 My pick and wale for ae bawbee.
                       Gillie-Callum, etc.

                 I can get a wife for tuppence,
                 I can get a wife for tuppence,
                 Wife for tuppence, wife for tuppence,
                 A useless ane for ae bawbee.
                       Gillie-Callum, etc.”


                         “THE REEL O’ TULLOCH”

has two alleged origins, but one at least is discredited by the known
character of the people concerned. It was on a wild Sunday in the parish
of Tulloch, Aberdeenshire, that the minister, thinking his people would
not venture out, stayed at home. His congregation, however, to whom the
kirk was a trysting-place, turned up as usual. For a time they waited
patiently enough, but by and bye, moved by the stormy weather and their
minister’s absence, they proposed refreshments. The collection ladle was
sent round, and the proceeds invested in “yill” at the neighbouring
change-house. As the liquor took effect the fun grew more furious, and
at last a dance was suggested. The enthusiasm rose even to this height,
the village cobbler mounted the pulpit, the blacksmith from the
precentor’s box roared out the ditty “John, come kiss me now,” and the
floor rang with the flying feet of the dancing congregation. The
fiddler, impressed for the occasion, allowed his bow to get more and
more into the spirit of the gathering; it went madder and madder as the
excitement increased, and at last, in a sudden burst of inspiration, he
improvised the dance tune of all dance tunes—“Reel o’ Tulloch.”
Tradition is silent as to what befel the revellers in so sacred a place,
as well it may. It is hardly possible to imagine a company of Scottish
Established Church people looking at a fiddler on the Sabbath, much less
dancing in church to his music.

Strathspey also claims the tune, and in competition with Deeside, it has
a fierce tradition on the subject. The district of Tulloch lies at the
back of the Abernethy forest, and here is said to have occurred the
incident that inspired the maddest of Highland reels. A certain John Mac
Gregor, commonly known as _Iain Dubh Gearr_, was at Killin at a market
held somewhere between 1550 and 1580. In the house of call there, known
as “Streethouse,” he was set upon by eight men, but being powerful and a
splendid swordsman, he discomfited all his adversaries, killing some and
wounding others. Then he fled to Strathspey, where he married a woman
named Isabel Anderson (one version of the story has it that Mac Gregor
got into trouble with some Robertsons through having married this
Isabel, who was sought by a Robertson, and that these and not market
acquaintances were his enemies). His foes followed him, and one night
thirteen of them arrived at his house, determined to take him dead or
alive. John was sleeping in the barn when they came, and when he was
wakened and told of his danger he determined to fight it out. Isabel and
he had a gun and a pistol and plenty of ammunition, and they defended
the barn against all comers. John fired the weapons one after the other
alternately through crevices in the walls, and Isabel kept them loaded.
The thirteen outside, handicapped as they were by the shelter from which
the defenders worked, were very soon all wounded, whereupon John sallied
out and cut off their heads. Then Isabel in her glee gave him a big
draught of beer, which he drank, and seizing his spouse by the waist
they improvised and danced those reel steps which have ever since been
so popular. The music must have been old, but the words are of the date
of this incident:—

                  “At Streethouse at _Feill Fhaolan_,
                  On him they made an onset dead;
                  And were he not most manly brave,
                  Eight sturdy men had mastered him.
                        From Tullechin to Ballechin,
                        From Ballechin to Tullechin;
                        If beer we don’t in Tullechin,
                        We’ll water get in Ballechin.”

The song then, at considerable length, tells the story until:—

              “Says Black John, turning towards his bride,
              ‘Since I did what I meant to do,
              Give me a drink of beer to quaff,
              And we will dance the Tullechin.’
                    From Tullechin, etc.”

The story has two traditional endings. In the one John became a
peaceable and prosperous man, and as his name appears in authoritative
documents of date 1568, it is the more likely to be true. The other is
tragic. Mac Gregor’s enemies, according to it, still hunted the couple,
and Isabel was thrown into prison. Then Mac Gregor himself was shot, and
his head brought to Isabel. At the sight she was so struck with sorrow
that she suddenly expired.

It may not be inappropriate to conclude these stories of tunes with two
which are associated with ministers.


                           “THE PERIWIG REEL”

can always be depended on to provoke laughter when well played. It is
probably the composition of Mr. Fraser of Culduthal. This gentleman was
at a baptismal “entertainment” at the house of Fraser of Knockie, where
the presence of a very old and venerable minister could not restrain him
from exciting mirth. He sat next but one to the minister, and found
means over his neighbour’s shoulder to tickle below the parson’s large
wig with a long feather or a blade of corn. As the glass went round the
old man became uneasy, but suspected nobody. At last he got into a rage,
dreading an earwig or spider, and shook out his wig over a blazing fire,
which unfortunately got hold of it. It was too greasy to admit of its
being saved. Amid great laughter, it simmered in the fire till it had
almost suffocated the company. The minister’s bald head produced more
laughter at his expense, in which he himself joined, and he enjoyed the
joke thoroughly when it was told to him. The real name of the air is
“The Fried Periwig.”

The other tune is

                        “JENNY DANG THE WEAVER,”

and its story is somewhat interesting. Rev. Mr. Gardner, minister of the
parish of Birse, in Aberdeenshire, was well known for his musical
talents and his wit. One Saturday he was arranging his ideas for next
day’s service in his study, which overlooked the courtyard of the manse.
Outside his wife was beetling potatoes for supper. To unbend his mind a
little, Mr. Gardner took up his fiddle and begun to run over the notes
of an air he had previously jotted down, when suddenly an altercation
arose between Mrs. Gardner and Jock, the minister’s man, an idle sort of
weaver fellow from the neighbouring village of Marywell, who had lately
been engaged as man of all work about the manse. “Here, Jock,” cried the
mistress as Jock came in from the labours of the field, “gae wipe the
minister’s shoon.” “Na,” said Jock, “I’ll dae nae sich thing. I came
here to be yir ploo’man, but no yir flunkey, and I’ll nae wipe the
minister’s shoon.” “Deil confound yir impudence,” said the enraged Mrs.
Gardner, and she sprang at him with a heavy culinary implement, and
giving him a hearty beating, compelled him to perform the menial duties
required of him. The minister, who viewed the scene from his window, was
hugely diverted, and gave the air he had just completed the title of
“Jenny Dang the Weaver.” This is supposed to have occurred in 1746.
There is a well-known Gaelic song entitled “Trousers for meagre shanks,
and bonnets for the bald,” sung to the air.


                          OF OTHER CLAN TUNES

there are not many stories of general interest. The tunes are there, but
whence they came, or when they came, must ever remain a mystery. “Mac
Donald’s Salute” and “Mac Leod’s Salute” were composed by Donald _Mòr_
Mac Crimmon on the reconciliation of the Mac Leods and the Mac Donalds
after the battle of Bencuillein in Skye, and played when the chiefs met
at Dunvegan. There had been a feud between the clans, in the course of
which much blood was spilt. This feud at last became so notorious that
in 1601 the Privy Council interfered and requested the chiefs concerned
to disband their forces and leave Skye. It being known that both
intended to “mass togider grit nowmeris and forceis of thair kin and
freindschip,” and pursue each other “with fyre and sword and other
hostilitie by say and land,” they were required to release peacefully
all prisoners, and to observe the King’s peace. Ultimately a
reconciliation was effected, on which the chief of the Mac Leods invited
the chief of the Mac Donalds to a banquet at Dunvegan Castle. When
Donald Gorm _Mòr_ Mac Donald appeared in sight of the castle, he was met
by Mac Leod’s famous piper, Donald _Mòr_ Mac Crimmon, who welcomed him
by playing “Mac Donald’s Salute,” which he had composed for the
occasion. In connection with the same banquet he composed and played for
the first time “Mac Leod’s Salute.”

The stories I have given are, after all, but the merest pickings from
the wealth of lore which has now almost disappeared from the Highlands.
It irritates one considerably to find here and there fragments of what
were once fine tales, with perhaps important bearings on social life or
current history, and to realise the impossibility of ever obtaining them
complete. For this we have to thank the Sassenach over-running of the
Highlands, which resulted in the extinction of clan bard and clan piper—
who between them took the place of a literature—and did not even try to
introduce in their stead the blessings of that wider education which
preserves the life of a nation by better means, until after much of what
was worth preserving had vanished into a misty past. We have, for
instance, the “Lament for the Harp Tree,” connected either with some
tree on which the bards were wont to hang their harps, like captives in
Babylon of an even earlier age, or with the disappearance of the harp
itself, or, as the tune is called _Bean Sith_ in the North, with the
fairies in some way or other; _A mhic Iain mhic Sheumais_, which
celebrates some battle between the Mac Donalds and the Mac Leods;
another on _Blar léine_, or the “Shirt Battle,” fought at Kinloch Lochy
between the Frasers of Lovat and the Mac Donalds of Clan Ranald, and so
called from the parties having stripped to their shirts; “The Sister’s
Lament for her Brothers”; a lament expressive of the aged warrior’s
regret that he is no longer able to wield his sword; “Grim Donald’s
Sweetheart,” a salute of very ancient origin; _A Ghlas Mheur_, an
ancient pibroch composed by _Raonull Mac Ailean Oig_, a Mac Donald of
Morar, to which there is supposed to have been a wild story attached;
_Cogadh na Sith_, “war or peace,” one of the best known of tunes, and
one which, as its composition indicates a determination either to obtain
an honourable peace or engage in immediate war, must have had a story;
and any number of others, around which stories of love or adventure or
war must at one time have clustered. Tunes of later generations have no
stories to speak of. They have been composed on special occasions, or in
honour of certain people, but that is all. It is the old tunes we would
know more about, and the old stories. Several writers, notably Mr. J. F.
Campbell, of Islay; Alexander Mac Kenzie, of Inverness; Angus Mac Kay,
and Hector Mac Lean, of Ballygrant, Islay, did much good work by
gathering at first hand Highland legends and traditions; and in our own
day Henry Whyte, (“Fionn”), the _Celtic Monthly_, and others, are doing
a great deal to preserve what is left to us of Highland life and story.
But there is much yet to do, and to do quickly, for the generation that
knows of these things is fast passing away. This volume makes no claim
to originality. It is only a gathering together of material that is
common to Highland tradition and Highland literature, but if it shows
what an amount of such material, even on one side phase of Highland
life, really exists, it will have served a good purpose. In every hamlet
in the Highlands there is surely some individual patriotic enough to
take an interest in its folk-lore, and intelligent enough to see the
necessity for saving still more of it, and these people can do more to
preserve it, if only by giving it a place in the columns of the weekly
papers, than any one collector or writer. And why should there not be a
Highland Publishing Society, which would sell every known book on the
Highlands, take the financial risk of gathering material for new books,
and publishing them, and do the educational and other work now being
attempted by various societies? There are already enough of county
societies and clan societies working only for their own county or clan.
Such distinctions have been broken down by the march of civilisation,
and with the intermixing of the clans and the free movement of the
people all over the country, the societies have little more than the
sentiment of the past, a sound enough reason, no doubt, to justify their
existence. But there is the Highlands and the language and the music,
the scattered literature and half-Anglicised people, and if Highlanders
with a craze for organising will but think on these things and build up
some organisation that will become the natural rallying point of
everything Highland, it is not yet too late to let the world see that
the Scottish Highlands has a history and a literature worthy of a far
higher place among the nations of the earth than the earth has yet given
them. As to its music:—

       “Long may its lays be heard on Scotia’s hills,
       Which call no more her clans in fray to meet,
       And dye with kindred blood their native rills;
       And, as blythe echoes the shrill notes repeat,
       May Scottish hearts with kindling raptures beat;
       For valour’s throb no more obeys the call,
       Than laughs the eye with mirthful jollity
       When the pipe sounds at village festival.
       Such power, loved pibroch, has thy magic minstrelsy.

       Thee from her hall let heartless fashion spurn,
       For softer warblings of the Italian string;
       Let luxury or wantoned dalliance burn,
       Yet into hearts that round our Scotia cling,
       With thy dear lays shall patriot raptures spring;
       And he who can o’er faded glory sigh,
       Who to oppression’s children gives the tear,
       Will say, while awful transport lights his eye,
       No generous soul is theirs, unmoved thy strains who hear.”




                               APPENDIX.


It was at first intended that the Appendix to this book should contain a
tutor to the bagpipe. It was, however, seen that to do this would not
only be departing from the avowed character of the undertaking—the
production of a thoroughly untechnical book, and one that would appeal
to players and non-players alike—but it would also be encroaching on the
preserves of the publishers of pipe music, nearly all of whom preface
their volumes with a tutor. Other, and it is hoped, equally interesting
matter has been substituted.




                               Appendix.


                       I.—THE SCALE OF THE PIPES.

                      BY JOHN MAC NEILL, LANGHOLM.

In making a few observations on the scale of the bagpipe (_Piob-mhorna
h-Alba_) it is not necessary to go deeply into the evolution of
instrumental music, but it may be well to state shortly that the
earliest instruments devised for expressing musical sounds, that is
sounds having a definite relation to one another, were of two distinct
orders, the first probably being the reed or pipe, made of various
materials, such as straw, reeds, bone, wood, or metal, blown by the
mouth and giving a single note which varied in pitch according to the
diameter and length of the tube or pipe through which the wind escaped.
The second order was a stringed instrument wherein cords varied in
length and thickness were fixed at both ends upon a suitable frame, and
the sound was produced by plucking with the finger and allowing the cord
to vibrate freely.

The next stage was to make vents or holes in the pipe, arranged so that
they could easily be covered by the fingers, and as the sound always
escaped by the hole nearest the reed, it was easy to produce a series of
sounds by removing one or more fingers in succession. In a somewhat
similar way, a series of sounds were obtained from the vibrations of a
single cord by pressing, or merely touching, it at certain points, and
thus shortening the portion which was allowed to vibrate.

The primary object of all music is to give pleasure through the ear by
imitating, or reproducing, more or less correctly, the sound of the
human voice, and other natural sounds, so we find that as early
instruments began to be improved they were so constructed as to produce
various notes having the same intervals between them as are found
between the tones of the human voice. In this way instruments with a
fixed scale were obtained, and we know that in course of time various
nations improved the instruments they had in use, the ancient Greeks
especially bringing the art of music and their favourite stringed
instrument, the lyre, to a high degree of perfection.

The great defect of all the more ancient instruments was their limited
compass, most of them containing from five to ten notes only, thus
rendering it impossible to play anything upon them except by the same
series of notes and at the same pitch. This was gradually remedied, both
as regards wind and stringed instruments, by adopting various devices
whereby their compass was extended, and by introducing, with more or
less accuracy, new notes called semi-tones between the original notes.
The modern method of tuning musical instruments by “equal temperament”
was unknown until the time of Johann Sebastian Bach (1685–1750) who,
disregarding the custom which had prevailed until his day, of writing in
a few keys only, and tuning instruments so as to render these keys
nearly perfect at the expense of the rest, himself tuned the instruments
on which he played in “equal temperament.” When he first began to play
music on the harpsicord, tuned in the old way, in other than the keys in
which it was originally composed, the effect was almost unbearable, and
it thus became necessary to alter the relation of the notes throughout
the whole scale by framing a complete chromatic scale having exactly the
same interval between each semi-tone. In this way every note was
slightly altered from the true natural scale, but not to such an extent
as to seriously offend the ear.

It is obvious that to have a perfect chromatic scale a separate string
or pipe is required for each note in such instruments as the organ and
pianoforte, while it is obtained in those of the flute and oboe class by
making additional holes in the tube at the correct intervals and
covering them with close-fitting pads with levers (keys) within
convenient reach of the fingers. (Having mentioned the oboe, it may be
remarked in passing that its tone has been called “bagpipe music
sublimated.”) Various attempts have been made to adapt similar
appliances to the chanter of the bagpipe, but the results have not been
satisfactory, and its scale remains practically the same as it was two
centuries ago. It will be shown, however, with the aid of the table of
vibrations appended to this article, that it does not differ so widely
from the natural or “equal temperament” scales as the critics allege.

The scale of the bagpipe closely resembles what is known as the Greek
scale, having a flat seventh, if we take it as running from A to A^|,
with a supplementary note G (the lowest on the instrument). While this
is true, a reference to the table of vibrations shows that other scales
can be rendered with a fair amount of correctness. A great deal has been
written on this subject, much of it tending to show that the bagpipe is
hardly, if at all, entitled to be considered a musical instrument. One
writer starts with the assumption that the first or lowest note is the
keynote of its scale, and thereby, very easily, comes to the conclusion
that all the rest of the notes are out of tune. As well might it be
asserted that the lowest note in any piece of music is the keynote of
such piece; and it is obvious that taking the highest note on the
bagpipe for the keynote and descending, quite a different result would
be arrived at. There are various other writers who seem unable to
distinguish between the Great Highland Bagpipe and the Italian and
French bagpipes. With these it has hardly anything in common except the
name.

It is pretty certain that the pipe chanter was at first used without a
bag, and blown directly from the mouth, as a practising chanter still
is, and that its key was D, thus giving an equal number of notes above
and below. Afterwards two drones were fitted into the bag along with the
chanter, probably in unison with one another, and with the lower A on
the chanter, the key of the Greek scale already referred to. The
instrument remained in this form for a long period. In the seventeenth
century probably a third and longer drone (_dos mor_) was added, tuned
an octave below the others. The drones form a fixed bass, and, according
to the well-established principle in music that the bass always ends
with the keynote, this may furnish very good ground for saying that the
true scale is A, with which, indeed, a very large proportion of pipe
music ends. But taking the note D on the chanter as the keynote, it is
found that the notes _above_ it are nearly in perfect tune, as can be
easily observed by playing any well-known air in that key that falls
within the compass of the _piob mhor_. Of course, it can be seen at a
glance from the table of vibrations annexed that the scale of D is very
nearly the same as that of A with a flat seventh. The use of this flat
seventh descending is so common in minor scales as to form, after the
minor third, one of their chief characteristics; and it does not greatly
offend even the critical cultivated modern ear, when not an accented
note nor leading directly to the key note. According to the principle
mentioned already, that the bass always ends with the key note, it must
be assumed that A is really the key note of the bagpipe scale, seeing
the drones are tuned to that note; and starting from that point we find
that A, C, E, A^| are Do, Mi, So, Do^| of the scale of A. Taking the
higher Do of this scale and descending a fifth, we find D (Fa), and
taking this as the key of a new scale, we find that D, F, A^|, A are Do,
Mi, So, Soˌ of the scale of D. In the same way, taking the fifth below
D—that is, G—we find that G, B, D, G^| are Do, Mi, So, Do^| of the scale
of G. On referring to the table of vibrations it will be seen that all
these notes are very nearly correct in the scales mentioned, whatever
their Sol-Fa names, the only differences being that B should be a little
sharper in the key of A than in D and G, and that E should be a little
flatter in the key of G than in D and A. For comparison there is a
column inserted in the table giving the vibrations according to “equal
temperament” of the chromatic scale from G to A^| . None of the notes of
the bagpipe admit of being sharpened or flattened except the upper G,
which can be slightly sharpened by opening the E hole along with G and
E. The notes D, C, B can be slightly flattened by lifting one finger
only, with all those below it closed, but passages requiring this
fingering are hardly met with except in pibrochs (_Ceòl mor_). The scale
given in the annexed table is, I venture to submit, the true scale of
the bagpipe. It is as perfect as can constructed upon an instrument of
such limited compass without the aid of valves, and places it much on a
level with the other instruments in use up to the time of Bach, already
referred to, whereby the approximate correctness of a few keys was
obtained by the sacrifice of all the others. It is possible that pipe
chanters may not always be bored with perfect accuracy, and that in the
case of very old instruments the holes may get enlarged by wear so as to
be more or less out of tune, but I think that the true “bearings” are as
I have stated.

Is is to be noted that but very few of the airs of our Gaelic songs can
be played on the bagpipe, a fact which we think goes far to prove that
the instrument was designed and used for martial purposes in the open
air. Indeed the _timbre_ of the instrument renders it unsuitable for
playing in concert with the human voice.

It is, I think, a matter of great satisfaction to all Highlanders and to
those who love the race, that so many intelligent and praiseworthy
efforts are being made at the present time to preserve and cultivate our
national music.

The following is the table of vibrations of musical scales forming the
foundations of the scale for the bagpipe:—

 ┌───────┬────────────────────────────────┬────────────┬──────────────────────────┐
 │ Notes │Sol-fa Names with Vibrations in │   Equal    │     True Pipe Scale.     │
 │on the │                                │Temperament.│                          │
 │staff. │                                │            │                          │
 ├───────┼───────┬───────┬───────┬────────┼────────────┼──────────────┬───────────┤
 │       │   C   │   G   │   D   │   A    │            │    Staff.    │Vibrations.│
 ├───────┼───────┼───────┼───────┼────────┼────────────┼──────────────┼───────────┤
 │A      │l 880  │rˈ 891 │so 891 │doˈ 891 │891         │[Illustration]│891        │
 │G sharp│       │       │       │t       │841         │              │           │
 │       │       │       │       │835⁵⁄₁₅ │            │              │           │
 │G      │so 792 │doˈ 792│f 792  │        │794         │              │792        │
 │F sharp│       │t 742½ │m 742½ │l 742½  │750         │              │742½       │
 │F      │f 704  │       │       │        │706         │              │           │
 │E      │m 660  │l 660  │r 666¼ │so 668¼ │666         │              │668¼       │
 │D sharp│       │       │       │627     │            │              │           │
 │D      │r 594  │s 594  │do 594 │f 594   │592         │              │594        │
 │C sharp│       │       │tˌ 556⅞│m 556⅞  │559         │              │556⅞       │
 │C      │do 528 │f 528  │       │        │528         │              │           │
 │B      │tˌ 495 │m 495  │lˌ 495 │r       │499         │              │495        │
 │       │       │       │       │501³⁄₁₀ │            │              │           │
 │A sharp│       │       │       │        │471         │              │           │
 │A      │lˌ 440 │r 445½ │soˌ    │doˌ 445½│445½        │              │445½       │
 │       │       │       │445½   │        │            │              │           │
 │G sharp│       │       │       │tˌ      │420         │              │           │
 │       │       │       │       │417²¹⁄₃₂│            │              │           │
 │G      │soˌ 396│do 396 │fˌ 396 │        │397         │              │396        │
 └───────┴───────┴───────┴───────┴────────┴────────────┴──────────────┴───────────┘

NOTE.—These calculations are made assuming that C in the middle of the
staff has 528 vibrations, but of course whatever pitch be taken the
relative proportion of the notes remains the same. Fractions, except in
the case of one note, are omitted in the scale of equal temperament.


                          II.—PRACTICAL HINTS.

              BY PIPE-MAJOR A. D. CAMPBELL, BONAR BRIDGE.


                       I.—CARRIAGE OF THE PIPES.

If the player is standing the body should be perfectly upright, head
erect, and eyes carelessly fixed on some object as high as himself.
Great care should be taken that the shoulder on which the big drone
rests is not allowed to rise, or yield in any way to the weight or
blowing of the pipes; the head must not incline towards the big drone or
droop backwards or forwards; the chest must be kept inflated and the
shoulders square.

If the player is marching the shoulders should be allowed to swing to
and fro, the motion proceeding from the haunches only and not exceeding
what will suffice to give a free and easy step. His bearing should be
stately and lofty in accordance with the warlike instrument on which he
plays. In playing marching tunes the performer should never stand, if
possible, and when marching should beware of taking short stilted steps.
He should also practise reels in marching time, and play over irregular
ground, in order to gain confidence and command over his instrument.


                         II.—BLOWING THE PIPES.

In blowing the bagpipe, the cheeks must never be inflated nor the face
distressed in any way. There is really no hard work required, only a
little careful practice, and everything should be done as easily and
freely as possible. The bag does not at all times require to be filled
to its full extent, a little more than three-fourths being usually
sufficient. The player must not expend all his breath without resting,
as by so doing he will not only hurt but disable himself. The arm should
be pressed lightly on the bag, but allowed to yield gently to the wind
as it comes from the mouth, the pressure being gentle and steady and
according to the strength of the reeds. The player will at first find
some little difficulty in satisfactorily managing the bag, but when he
has succeeded he will be able to play in a free and commanding style,
and will have surmounted a difficulty which is a great bugbear to all
inexperienced players.


                         III.—TUNING THE PIPES.

When the pipes are first struck in, the big and outer drones should be
stopped by placing a finger over the hole of the bell of each. In doing
this or at any time when only one hand holds the chanter, the E note
should be sounded. The centre drone being nearest to the ear should, as
a rule, be tuned first. Should this drone not be in tune with the
chanter reed, a discord between them will ensue, and to get a chord the
point of the drone must be moved up or down, as the case may require. By
carefully listening to the chanter reed and moving the joint at the same
time, the player will easily discover whether the sounds are
assimilating or the discord increasing, and be able to suit his action
accordingly, until the sounds blend into one. The low A must now be
sounded, and the drone tuned to that note. (We may, however, tune to E,
high G, or in fact any note, providing the chanter reed is true to all
the notes, but in order to prove the reed and tune the pipes at the same
time, low A is generally preferred.) Afterwards sound high A to prove
whether the chanter reed is properly set, and true from low to high A.
If it is, the drone also will be in perfect chord with the latter note.
But should this not be the case and the drone cannot be brought to the
exact pitch with both notes. The discord, however slight, must be
divided between the two notes, and not left wholly on either. If the
pipe or the reeds are not defective, this should never occur, and the
reeds if properly fitted should tune about the centre of the joint.
After the centre drone is properly tuned, the outer should be begun by
placing the finger on the air-hole of the bell, or suddenly easing the
arm. This drone is not tuned to the chanter reed but to the drone
already tuned, in the same manner as that was tuned to the chanter reed.
The big drone is tuned to the other two in a similar manner.

After the centre drone has been tuned to the chanter reed, raising the
others to the same height in the tuning joint or in line with it, does
not always put the drones in tune. The reeds may differ materially in
tone, and they must be brought to the same pitch by studying the sounds
only. When the pipes are in tune all four reeds will chord. One may be
stronger or harsher than another, and still chord with it. It is
sometimes difficult for the learner to find the tuning mark, as it is
very exact. Care and practice makes it easy.

Young pipers should never play with their instruments out of tune, as
this will accustom their ears to discords, and they will eventually be
unable to tell when their pipes are in tune and when they are not.
Suddenly moving the joints up or down to their full extent will be found
capital practice for the beginner, as he cannot then fail to distinguish
discords. He should then move them cautiously back as if feeling for
something, and he will hear the jarring sounds gradually dying away
until they blend in chord. In tuning, care must be taken that the
pressure of wind on the reeds is exactly the same as when playing,
otherwise discord is inevitable.

Beginners should use reeds in the centre and big drones only, as the
pipes will then he easier blown, as well as easier tuned. The practice
can be discontinued when the player is able to blow freely. The further
down the drones are tuned the sharper the sound becomes, and the further
up the flatter or deeper. So if the chanter should have a sharp sound
the drone must also be made sharp, or _vice versa_. All new reeds are
generally sharp, and become flatter the longer they are played on.


                      IV.—REEDS AND THEIR DEFECTS.

Reeds have many defects, and nothing but experience combined with care
will make a piper thoroughly at home in dealing with them.

A new reed before being put into the chanter should be placed in water
for a few minutes. If it has lain past for some time it should be left
in the water longer, as the wood may have shrunk or the blades become
too open or close. New reeds can never be thoroughly depended on, as
they alter more or less with use. They should therefore never be cut or
interfered with before being tried. They are also, as a rule, harder to
blow than reeds which have been in use for some time; and, if after a
fair trial, they are still found to be too strong, they may then be
weakened at the discretion of the player. When a reed has a “dirling”
sound on the low hand (generally A or G), it is either too weak or too
lightly built. In the latter case, it will, combined with the “dirling”
sound, have a want of fulness of tone, and cannot be readily improved.
Should it be only too weak, it can be easily strengthened by being
opened carefully and gradually with a specially made implement of some
kind until it has a firm sound. This, of course, has to be done with
great care, or the reed may be rendered useless. When a reed is too
flat, the staple should be lowered into the chanter until the correct
sound is produced. If the staple is as far down as it can be got a
hairsbreadth may be cut from the point of the reed and the staple raised
or depressed as required. If after this the reed becomes too strong, the
blades may be slightly reduced with sandpaper. If the blades are already
sufficiently thin, but the point of the staple too open, it can be made
considerably closer by inserting a tapered instrument into the staple,
and giving the latter a slight tap with a small hammer. In this, care
must be taken that the instrument used is shaped as like the inside of
the staple as possible. In the event of the reed being too sharp, the
staple should be raised in the chanter as high as possible, when should
it still prove too sharp, it may be opened in the way already described.
This, however, should only be done when the staples or blades are too
close, as although the tone is rendered flatter by the process the reed
is more or less strained, which is apt to give it a sound insufficiently
full, and render the playing laborious without any object being gained.

The player should always bear in mind that the longer reeds are in use
the flatter they become. In cases where a reed is not very much out, it
can be toned down by frequent playing, rather than by experimenting with
it. When it is too strong and not too open in staples or blades it may
be partly because it contains too much wood, a matter which can be
easily rectified with fine sandpaper. A reed that is too strong owing to
its being too open in the blades can be made considerably closer and
easier to blow by taking a common cork, making a deep cut in the end of
it, and inserting the blades of the reed into the cut, then tying a
piece of cord round the cork sufficiently tight to close the blades, and
leaving it in that position for a few days. The width of the staple
should, however, be tested before this is done, as if it is too open
making it closer by the process already explained will make the blades
closer also, and save the trouble of using the cork.

It should be noticed that when chanter reeds have certain false notes,
such as a sharp high A or a flat high G or E, this is caused by the
reeds being improperly fitted, the points of the blades being too thin
or the sides of the reed being too thick. Care must therefore be taken,
when fitting a reed, that all the different notes are true, after which
it should never again be touched except when actually requiring
attention.

The beginner may find some difficulty in distinguishing the true sound
when the chanter reed is in his mouth. He should therefore put it unto
the pipe and sound it, when he will be better able to judge, as he will
hear the sound from a greater distance. The chanter reed should always
have a clear, distinct, shrill sound, accompanied with a full and firm
tone in every note.


                            V.—DRONE REEDS.

The small drone reeds should sound smooth and firm, with a clear humming
sound, and the big drone reed deep and bass, and strong enough to bear
the pressure of wind required for the chanter reed. New reeds are often
hard to “strike in,” and have a rough or sharp tone. This is owing to
their newness and dryness, and goes away with playing. They are also
frequently inclined to close or stop. This is caused by the steam of the
breath swelling the wood, and causing it to fall into its natural set.
In this case, the tongue of the reed should be raised as high as it will
admit of without straining, and the centre pressed down. Should it after
this become too rough or flat, it can be rectified by bringing the
tuning string a little towards the point of the tongue. Should this make
it too weak for the strength of the chanter reed, the best plan is to
raise the tongue and put a hair (out of the head) between the tongue and
body of the reed, and as far back as the tuning string will permit.

When a drone tunes too far up, that is when the tuning mark is higher
than the joint can be raised, it will be too sharp to admit of its
chording with the chanter reed. In that case the reed should be lowered—
_i.e._, given a smaller catch in the joint or drone. Should it still
prove too sharp, the tuning string should be moved backwards towards the
end placed in the joint. This ought to correct any ordinary reed. Should
it fail, the reed must be too short and cannot be amended except by
altering the chanter reed, which should never be done for such a
purpose, the chanter reed being always first set and the others set to
it.

When the tuning mark is too far down for the joint, and the tone cannot
be rendered sufficiently sharp, the required sound will in most cases be
produced by moving the tuning string towards the point of the tongue.
Should this fail, the reed may be put further into the joint of the
drone, or a very little cut off the end which goes into the joint.

When reeds have a rough, roaring sound they may be rectified by bringing
the tuning string nearer the point of the tongue, as before described. A
reed may have a burring, squealing, or double tone when blown up to the
full pitch of the chanter reed. This may be caused by the tuning string
being too tight, or it may be caused by the tongue being too heavy, in
which case the proper note may be obtained by cutting one or more
notches across the tongue. This will weaken the false sound, and with
regular playing it will disappear.

It must be remembered that over-blowing a reed will cause it to “dirl,”
and half covering any of the holes will cause the reeds to squeal. In
blowing, also, if the regular strength of wind is withheld from the
reeds, even for an instant, they will stop, or “hiccough,” as pipers
term it. The results of these mistakes must not be attributed to the
reeds.

An old reed may be made to wear much longer by putting one or more hairs
under the tongue where the tuning string is placed and using a new
tuning string.

A reed is said to be “water-locked” when it has become soft through
continuous use. Drone reeds only are liable to become water-locked, and
should never be over-played. When the mischief is done they must be laid
aside until properly dry.

Wet reeds should be taken out before the pipes are laid past, and the
water blown out of them. They should then be rolled between the hand and
knee and the tongue slightly lifted, after which they should be replaced
in the joints. Reeds should not be exposed to the air to dry. A common
bottle makes an excellent receptacle for them.

Young pipers should on no account tamper or experiment with their reeds,
unless they are perfectly certain of what they are to do, why they are
to do it, and what the result will be.


                    VI.—THE BAG, AND HOW TO KEEP IT.

For making the bag tight a paste composed of resin, beeswax and sweet
oil boiled together is here recommended. This, when cool, should be
slightly thicker than cream. After the stocks have been inserted a few
spoonfuls of this paste should be put in (lukewarm), then the stocks
stopped up and a little wind left in the bag to prevent its sides
sticking. The skin should be rubbed and wrought until it becomes
impregnated with the paste.

When pipes are much used, and the bag draws a good deal of water, the
reeds will always be damp. To remedy this, a little salt may be put into
the bag, which will cause the damp to be discharged through the skin.
This, however, might make an old bag give way altogether. Water should
never on any account be put into the bag.

The bag should always be soft and pliable. This can be managed in
several ways. After being dried, say half a teacupful of melted brown
sugar may be passed into it, and worked with the hands, the skin being
then hung up overnight for the surplus sugar to run out.


                    VII.—KEEPING THE PIPES IN ORDER.

Pipes as a rule should be cleaned thoroughly at least once a month, and
if much played on once a week. Cocoa-nut oil will be found to serve the
purpose best. When the pipes are to be cleaned the reeds should first be
removed, and either placed in a bottle or rolled in a damp rag. The
different joints should then be detached and the pieces cleaned outside
and inside with an oily rag, a long feather saturated with oil being
passed through the joints. If not required immediately, and after the
reeds have been reinserted, the instrument should then be laid past in
its oily state for a few hours. Before being used, the reeds should be
again abstracted and all the parts carefully cleaned. Care must be taken
that the warping on the joints is never allowed to get ragged or soaked
with water, as this will cause the joints to crack, or swell the hemp,
and render them difficult to move. The player cannot be too particular
in satisfying himself that none of the joints are too tight. New pipes,
especially in hot weather or warm climates, should before being used be
laid up for a few days in cocoanut oil and exposed daily to the sun;
care, however, being taken that they are not allowed to dry and that
they are frequently turned and well wetted with oil. This will season
the wood, and lessen the danger of splitting.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The young piper must not forget that it is the practice chanter that
makes the piper, and he should never attempt to play a tune on the full
set until he can play it thoroughly on the chanter. Quick and careless
playing should always be avoided. Also, the player should endeavour to
get into the spirit of the music by understanding the circumstances
under which each particular tune was composed and the feelings it is
meant to express. No man other than a Highlander can fully appreciate
the _piobaireachd_ or do justice to the wild, though majestic, strains.
The histories of the various tunes, with the words to which they are
set, would be invaluable to the player, and it is to be hoped that the
present volume will do something towards emphasising all the grand old
associations that cling round the Highland Bagpipe, and thus enable the
public to appreciate it all the more and pipers to play it all the
better.


                    III.—BIBLIOGRAPHY OF PIPE MUSIC.

The list of books of pipe music is not very long, but the difficulties
of making it complete and accurate are more than may at first appear.
The principal difficulty is in the matter of dates, publishers, no doubt
for good reasons, nearly always refraining from giving on their title
page the year in which the book was first issued. Some of the older
books, too, are now very rare, and there are not many people who have
anything like a complete set. The following list has been compiled with
every possible care:—

  1784—MAC DONALD—A collection of Highland Vocal Airs with a number of
        Country Dances or Reels of the North Highlands, a few Bagpipe
        Strathspeys and Reels set for the Violin, and also four
        Pibrochs, viz.:—Mac Intosh’s Lament, Mac Crimmon’s Lament, The
        Finger Lock, and Peace or War. Compiled and published by Rev.
        Patrick Mac Donald, minister of Kilmore, Argyllshire. Out of
        print.

  1803—MAC DONALD—A Treatise on the Theory, Principles and Practice of
        the Great Highland Bagpipe, to which is added one pibroch for a
        beginner; prepared by Joseph Mac Donald, Sutherlandshire, and
        published by his brother, Rev. Patrick Mac Donald, Kilmore. Out
        of print.

  1818—“AMATEUR”—A Preceptor for the Great Highland Bagpipe, with a few
        favourite simple airs; written and edited by “An Amateur,” and
        published by Oliver & Boyd, Edinburgh. Price 3s. Out of print.

  1822—MAC DONALD—A collection of the Ancient Martial Music of
        Caledonia, called _Piobaireachd_, consisting of 23 pieces, as
        performed on the Great Highland Bagpipe. Now also adapted to the
        pianoforte, violin and violincello; with a few old Highland
        lilts purposely set for the above modern instruments; to which
        is prefixed a complete tutor for attaining a thorough knowledge
        of pipe music. Respectfully dedicated to the Highland Societies
        of London and Scotland by Donald Mac Donald, and published by
        Alex. Robertson & Co., Edinburgh. Republished in 1855 by Messrs.
        J. & R. Glen. Price £1 1s.

  1828—MAC LEOD—_Canntaireachd_, a collection of twenty _Piobaireachd_
        or pipe tunes, as verbally taught by the Mac Crimmon pipers in
        the Isle of Skye to their apprentices; published as taken from
        John Mac Crimmon, piper to the old Laird of Mac Leod and his
        grandson, the late John Mac Leod of Mac Leod. Edited by Captain
        Neil Mac Leod of Gesto. Reprinted in 1880 by Messrs. J. & R.
        Glen, Edinburgh.

  1829—MAC DONALD—A collection of Quicksteps, Strathspeys, Reels and
        Jigs, consisting of 120 tunes, arranged for the Highland
        Bagpipe. Edited and published by Donald Mac Donald & Son, pipe
        makers, Edinburgh. Republished by Messrs. J. & R. Glen in 1848
        and frequently afterwards. Now in fifth edition. Price 2s.

  1838—MAC KAY—A collection of Ancient _Piobaireachd_ or Highland Pipe
        Music, consisting of sixty-one tunes, many of them adapted to
        the pianoforte, with instructions for learners of pipe music,
        sketches of the principal hereditary pipers, and historical and
        traditional notes respecting the origin of the various pieces.
        Edited and published by Angus Mac Kay, piper to the Queen.
        Second Edition published in 1839, also by Mac Kay. Price, £1
        15s. Reprinted in 1899 by Logan & Co., Inverness. Price, £1 1s.

  1841—MAC KAY—The Complete Tutor for the Great Highland Bagpipe, with a
        compendious selection of Marches, Quicksteps, Strathspeys,
        Reels, and Jigs, consisting of 100 tunes. The whole selected and
        arranged specially for the instrument by William Mac Kay, piper
        to the Celtic Society of Scotland. Published by Alexander Glen,
        Edinburgh. Corrected and improved by Angus Mac Kay in 1843 and
        republished by Mr. Glen. Price 4s. Out of print.

  1843—MAC KAY—The Pipers’ Assistant, a collection of Marches,
        Quicksteps, Strathspeys, Reels, and Jigs, consisting of 155
        tunes. Edited by Angus Mac Kay, piper to the Queen. Edinburgh,
        published by Alexander Glen, bagpipe maker, 30 West Regent
        Street, London, by Angus Mac Kay. Price 8s. Out of print.

  1847—GUNN—The Caledonian Repository of Strathspeys, Reels, Jigs, and
        Quicksteps, consisting of about 200 pieces. Edited and published
        by William Gunn, piper, Glasgow. Enlarged by about a dozen tunes
        in 1867, and republished by Gunn. Republished in 1892 and 1889
        by Peter Henderson, Glasgow. Price 6s.

  1853—MAC LACHLAN—The Pipers’ Assistant, containing 120 tunes. Compiled
        by John Mac Lachlan, piper to Neil Malcolm of Poltalloch, and
        published by Alex. Glen, Edinburgh. Price 6s. Out of print.

  1860—GLEN—The Caledonian Repository of Music for the Great Highland
        Bagpipe, consisting of Marches, Strathspeys, Reels and
        Quicksteps to the number of 120 tunes. Edited and published by
        Alexander Glen, Edinburgh. Revised and republished by David Glen
        in 1882. Price, 6s. Out of print.

  1869—ROSS—A collection of Marches, Strathspeys, Reels, and Pibrochs,
        consisting of 243 pieces. Edited and published by William Ross,
        piper to the Queen. Several editions since published, and book
        now contains 41 pibrochs and 437 marches, etc. Republished in
        1900 by Mrs. Ross. Price, £1 10s.

  1870–1871—GLEN—Parts I., II., and III. of Glen’s collection for the
        Great Highland Bagpipe, consisting of about 160 tunes. Edited
        and published by J. & R. Glen, Edinburgh. Price, originally 3s.
        each part, now 1s.

  1876–1901—GLEN—Parts I. to XVII. of a collection of Bagpipe Music,
        consisting altogether of about 1000 pieces. Edited and published
        by David Glen. Edinburgh, at different times between 1876 and
        1901. Price, each part, 1s; complete volume, with tutor, £1.

  1876—MAC PHEE—A selection of Music for the Highland Bagpipe,
        consisting of about 150 Quicksteps, Marches, Strathspeys, Reels,
        etc., with a complete tutor. Edited and published by Donald Mac
        Phee, Glasgow. Price, 6s., in cloth 7s. Republished in 1895 by
        Messrs. Logan & Co., Inverness, in two volumes, at 2s. each.

  1880—MAC PHEE—A collection of Pibrochs, consisting of 37 tunes. Edited
        and published by Donald Mac Phee, bagpipe maker, Glasgow.
        Republished in 1885 by Messrs. Logan & Company, Inverness.
        Price, 8s.

  1880–1899—GLEN—Parts I. to IV. of a collection of Ancient
        _Piobaireachd_ or Highland Pipe Music, consisting altogether of
        55 tunes; arranged, revised, and published by David Glen,
        Edinburgh, at different times between 1880 and 1899. Price 4s.
        each part.

  1881—GLEN—David Glen’s Highland Bagpipe Tutor, with a selection of
        Quicksteps, Strathspeys, Reels, and Jigs, amounting to 50 tunes.
        David Glen, Edinburgh. Price, 3s. Now in 13th thousand, price,
        1s.

  1887—MAC KINNON—A collection of Highland Pipe Music, consisting of
        Marches, Strathspeys, and Reels to the number of 82 tunes, with
        a complete Tutor. Edited and published by Robert Mac Kinnon,
        bagpipe maker, Glasgow. Republished by Mr. Mac Kinnon in 1898.
        Price 4s.

  1888—HENDERSON—Henderson’s Bagpipe Collection of Marches, Strathspeys,
        and Reels, extending to 138 tunes. Edited and published by Peter
        Henderson, bagpipe maker, Glasgow. Price 5s.

  1891—HENDERSON—Henderson’s Bagpipe Tutor and Collection of Marches,
        Strathspeys, and Reels, to the extent of 56 pieces. Price 2s.

  1899—BETT—A Collection of Pibrochs, Marches, Strathspeys, and Reels,
        consisting of 198 tunes. Edited and published by James Bett,
        Strathtay. Price, £1 1s.

  1899—LOGAN—A collection of Marches, Quicksteps, Laments, Strathspeys,
        Reels, and Country Jigs, consisting of sixty pieces. Logan &
        Co., Inverness. Price 1s.

  1900—GLEN—The Music of the Clan Mac Lean, consisting of 25 pieces,
        compiled under the auspices of the Clan Mac Lean Society of
        Glasgow. Edited and published by David Glen, Edinburgh. Price,
        in paper, 5s., in cloth gilt, 7s. 6d.

  1900—HENDERSON—Henderson’s Tutor for the Bagpipe and collection of
        Marches, Strathspeys, Reels, Country Dances, Jigs, etc.,
        consisting of 197 pieces. Peter Henderson, Glasgow. Price 7s.
        6d.

  1900—THOMASON—A collection of _Piobaireachd_ as played on the Great
        Highland Bagpipe—_Ceol Mòr_—compiled, edited, and rendered in a
        new and easily acquired notation by Major-General C. S.
        Thomason, R.E. (Bengal). Published by C. S. Thomason, c/o S.
        Sidders & Co., 17 and 19 Ball Street, Kensington, London, W.


         IV.—GOLD MEDALISTS OF THE HIGHLAND SOCIETY OF LONDON.

In 1781, the Highland Society of London instituted competitions in
pibroch playing. It was not, however, until 1835 that the gold medal now
so well known as the highest honour attainable by pipers, was first
awarded. The following is a list of the first prize winners and gold
medalists so far as it has been found possible to obtain them.
Unfortunately for the absolute authenticity of the list, the records of
the Highland Society were lost in a fire sometime ago, and the
secretary, therefore, could not supply them officially. It has, however,
been carefully compiled from Angus Mac Kay’s book of pipe music, the
files of the _Glasgow Herald_ and those of the _Inverness Courier_, and
it may be relied on as thoroughly accurate:—

 1781 —Patrick Mac Gregor, Ardradour, Perthshire.

 1782 —John Mac Allister, West Fencible Regiment.

 1783 —Neil Mac Lean, Airds.

 1784 —John Mac Gregor, senr., Fortingall.

 1785 —Donald Mac Intyre, senr., Rannoch.

 1786 —Roderick Mac Kay, North Berwick.

 1787 —Archibald Mac Gregor, Glenlyon.

 1788 —John Mac Gregor, Strathtay.

 1789 —Duncan Mac Nab, Lorne.

 1790 —Robert Mac Intyre.

 1791 —Donald Mac Rae, Applecross.

 1792 —John Mac Kay, Raasay.

 1793 —John Mac Gregor, Breadalbane Fencibles.

 1794 —Angus Cameron.

 1795 —Peter Mac Gregor.

 1796 —Donald Fisher, Breadalbane.

 1797 —Alexander Mac Gregor, Glenlyon.

 1798 —Donald Mac Earchar.

 1799 —Dugald Mac Intyre.

 1800 —George Graham.

 1801 —William Forbes.

 1802 —John Buchanan, 42nd Highlanders.

 1803 —Donald Robertson, Edinburgh Volunteers.

 1804 —Malcolm Mac Gregor.

 1805 —Duncan Mac Master, Coll.

 1806 —John Mac Gregor, London.

 1807 —Donald Mac Nab.

 1808 —John Mac Gregor, 73rd Regiment.

 1809 —Peter Forbes, Foss.

 1810 —Allan Mac Lean, Mull.

 1811 —John Mac Gregor.

 1812 —Donald Mac Gregor.

 1813 —Finlay Mac Leod.

 1814 —Robert Mac Kay, Sutherlandshire.

 1815 —John Mac Kay, Sutherlandshire.

 1816 —Donald Mac Kay, Glasgow.

 1817 —Donald Mac Donald, Argyllshire.

 1818 —Allan Mac Donald.

 1819 —John Campbell.

 1820 —William Mac Kay, piper to Celtic Society.

 1821 —Adam Graham.

 1822 —Donald Mac Kay.

 1823 —John Mac Kenzie.

 1824 —Donald Scrimgeour.

 1825 —Donald Stewart.

 1826 —John Gordon.

 1829 (First triennal competition)—John Mac Nab, 92nd Highlanders.

 1832 —Roderick Mac Kay, Abercairney.

 1835 (First competition for gold medal)—John Mac Kenzie, piper to the
        Marquis of Breadalbane.[17]

 1838 —John Mac Beth, piper to Highland Society of London.

 1841 —Donald Mac Innes, late piper to Colonel Mac Neill of Barra.

 1844 —Donald Cameron, piper to Sir James J. R. Mac Kenzie of Scatwell.

Footnote 17:

  In Chapter XIX., page 278, the date 1838 is given by mistake instead
  of 1835, as the year of this competition. Also, on page 284, it is
  stated that John Bane Mac Kenzie and Donald Cameron were the only
  players who held the title of “King of Pipers.” That there were at
  least two others is, however, shown by this list.

There is a blank between 1844 and 1859 which it has not been found
possible to bridge. In 1844 we leave the competitions being held
triennially at Edinburgh; in 1859 we find the Gold Medal being competed
for at the Northern Meeting, Inverness, as “a new feature.” Several
other competitions are reported during these fifteen years, and well-
known names are given as prize-winners, but there is no mention of the
Highland Society’s Gold Medal. It would be interesting to know if the
competition was discontinued during these years.

  1859 (First competition under auspices of Northern Meeting,
        Inverness)—Donald Cameron, piper to Seaforth.

  1860—Alex. Mac Lennan, pipe-major, Inverness Militia.

  1861—D. Mac Kenzie, 25th Borderers, Shorncliffe.

  1862—Alex. Cameron, Greenock Rifle Volunteers.

  1863—Ronald Mac Kenzie, 78th Highlanders.

  1864—Alex. Mac Donald, piper to Mac Pherson of Glentruin.

  1865—Colin Cameron, piper to Mr. Malcolm of Glenmarog.

  1866—Wm. Mac Kinnon, 74th Highlanders, Limerick.

  1867—John Mac Lennan, piper to the Earl of Fife. Donald Cameron, piper
        to Mr. K. W. S. Mac Kenzie, of Seaforth, was this year “Champion
        of Champions.”

  1868—Andrew Gordon, piper to the Earl of Seafield, Balmacaan, Glen-
        Urquhart.

  1869—Wm. Mac Donald, piper to the Prince of Wales.

  1870—Alex. Cameron, piper to the Marquis of Huntly.

  1871—Malcolm Mac Pherson, piper to Cluny Mac Pherson.

  1872—Donald Mac Kay, piper to Sir George Mac Pherson Grant, Bart., of
        Ballindalloch.

  1873—Duncan Mac Dougall, piper to the Earl of Breadalbane. Champion of
        Champions, Ronald Mac Kenzie, 78th Highlanders.

  1874—John Smith, 93rd Highlanders, Lochgilphead.

  1875—Ronald Mac Kenzie, piper to Neil Mac Donald of Dunach.

  1876—John Mac Kenzie, Royal Caledonian Asylum, London. Champion of
        Champions, Duncan Mac Dougall, piper to the Earl of Breadalbane.

  1877—John Mac Bean, piper to Lord Middleton.

  1878—Lewis Grant, piper to the Earl of Seafield. 1879—William Mac
        Lennan, Dundee. 1880—John J. Connan, piper to John H. Dixon,
        Inveran. 1881—Angus Mac Rae, piper to Mr. E. H. Wood of Raasay.
        1882—Angus Mac Donald. South Morar. 1883—A. D. Longair, 2nd A.
        and S. Highlanders. 1884—John Mac Coll, Oban. 1885—Pipe-Major J.
        Mac Dougall Gillies, Glasgow. 1886—R. Meldrum, 93rd Sutherland
        Highlanders. 1887—Alex. Fletcher, Invermoriston. 1888—William
        Boa, piper to Mr. Dixon of Inveran. 1889—John Mac Kay, 4th A.
        and S. Highlanders. 1890—John Mac Donald, Glentromie Lodge,
        Kingussie. 1891—Colin Thomson, 3rd Seaforth Highlanders. 1892—
        John Cameron, 2nd Cameron Highlanders. 1893—Pipe-Major Matheson,
        3rd Highland Light Infantry. 1894—Pipe-Major D. Campbell,
        Scottish Rifles. 1895—Murdo Mac Kenzie, piper to Mr. A. G.
        Butter of Fascolly. 1896—Alec. Mac Kenzie, Resolis, Invergordon.
        1897—Wm. Campbell, second piper to the Queen. 1898—Murdoch Mac
        Kenzie, Church Street, Inverness. 1899—D. C. Mather, Lochcarron.
        1900—W. G. Meldrum, Moy Hall.

The Highland Society of London, have also, since 1875, presented a gold
medal at the Argyllshire Gathering, to be competed for under the same
conditions as that at the Northern Meeting. The two medals are of about
equal value, and, though neither can be won twice by the same
competitor, one piper may win both. The following are the prize winners
at the Argyllshire Gathering, as kindly supplied by the secretary, Mr.
Alexander Sharp, Oban:—

 1875, Sept.  8.— John Mac Bean, Culloden.

 1876,   „   13.— Malcolm Mac Pherson, Cluny.

 1877,   „   12.— John Mac Bean, Culloden.

 1878,   „   11.— William Mac Lennan, Inverness.

 1879,   „   10.— George Mac Donald, South Morar.

 1880,   „   15.— Pipe-Major Robert Mac Kinnon, Skipness.

 1886,   „    8.— Pipe-Major Robert Meldrum, Argyll and Sutherland
                    Highlanders.

 1887,   „   14.— Pipe-Major John Mac Kay, 4th Argyll and Sutherland
                    Highlanders, Paisley.

 1888,   „   12.— Kenneth Mac Donald, Braemar.

 1889,   „   11.— John Mac Pherson, Cluny.

 1890,   „   10.— Norman Mac Pherson, Loch Lomond.

 1891,   „    9.— D. C. Mather, Loch Carron.

 1892,   „   14.— A. R. Mac Coll, Oban.

 1893,   „   13.— Pipe-Major Wm. Robb, 91st Highlanders.

 1894,   „   12.— Pipe-Major George Ross, Black Watch.

 1895,   „   11.— John Mac Kenzie, Glasgow.

 1896,   „    9.— Gavin C. Mac Dougall, Aberfeldy.

 1897,   „    8.— John Mac Donald, Kingussie.

 1898,   „   14.— Farquhar Mac Rae, Glasgow.

 1899,   „   13.— Murdo M’Kenzie, Inverness.

 1900,     ——     No Gathering.

From 1880 till 1886 no Medal was given.


                    V.—DIRECTORY OF BAGPIPE MAKERS.

The making of bagpipes is almost, if not quite confined to Scotland. One
or two firms in London profess to be makers, but they either make very
little or get the instruments from Scotland. There are no makers abroad,
but a large trade is done by Scottish makers with colonial customers.
The following is a list of all the makers of any professional standing:—

              ABERFELDY—
                    Gavin Mac Dougall.

              DUNDEE—
                    David Thow, 45 and 47 Gellatly Street.

              EDINBURGH—
                    John Centre & Sons, 12 Grove Street.
                    David Glen, 8 Greenside Place.
                    J. & R. Glen, North Bank Street.
                    J. & W. Hutcheon, 3 Niddry Street.

              GLASGOW—
                    Peter Henderson, 100 Renfrew Street.
                    Robert Mac Kinnon, 59 Renfrew Street.


                VI.—THE LARGEST KNOWN LIST OF PIBROCHS.

The following list of pibrochs, which is the index to Major-General
Thomason’s _Ceol Mor_,[18] is the most complete that has ever been
published. With the exception of three new tunes included in _The Music
of the Clan Mac Lean_, and one or two others, it contains all the
pibrochs known to present day players, while the particulars as to
composers’ names and dates of origin are more full than anyone else has
attempted:—

Footnote 18:

  See page 110.

           ENGLISH.                     GAELIC.             AUTHOR AND
                                                               DATE.

 Abercairney’s Salute         _Fàilte Aberchàrnaig_

 Aged Warrior’s Lament, The   _Cumha Chlaibh_

 Allan, Lament for Young      _Cumha Ailein Oig_

 Altearn, The Battle of       _Blàr Allt-Eire_             1645.

 Anapool, Lament for Lady     _Cumha Ban-tighearna
                                Anapuil_

 Antrim, Lament for the Earl  _Cumha Iarla Antruim_
   of

 Argyll’s Salute              _Fàilte Marcus
                                Earraghaidheal_

 Army, The Red Tartaned       _An t-arm breac dearg_

 Athole, The Battle of        _Blàr Athol_

 Athol Salute, The            _Fàilte Dhiuc Athol_

 Away to your tribe, Ewen, or _Gu do bhuidheann Eoghainn_
   Lochiel’s Salute


 Balladruishaig, The Battle   _Blàr Bhaile Dhruisheig_
   of

 Battle of the Bridge (or     _Ceann drochaid Pheairt_
   Inch) of Perth, The

 Battle of Doirneag, The      _Blàr nan Dòirneag_

 Battle of Glenshiel, The     _Blàr Ghlinn Seile_          J. D. Mac
                                                             Kay.

 Bealach na bròige, The       _Blàr Bealach na bròige_
   Battle of

 Beinn na Greine              _Beinn na Gréine_

 Bells of Perth, The          _Cluig Pheairt_

 Beloved Scotland, I leave    _Albainn bheadarach’s mise
   Thee gloomy                  ’gad fhàgail_

 Berisdale Salute, The        _Fàilte Morair Bharisdail_   A. Mac
                                                             Lennan.

 Bicker, The                  _Port a’ Mheàdsair_

 Big Spree, The, or You’re    _An Daorach mhor (Tha’n
   drunk and had better sleep   daorach ort’s feairrd thu
                                cadal)_

 Black Donald of the Isles,   _Piobaireachd Dhomhnuill
   March of                     Duibh_

 Black Watch’s Salute, The    _Fàilte an Fhreiceadain      J. Mac
                                Duibh_                       Donald,
                                                             1730.

 Blind Piper’s Obstinacy, The _Crosdachd an Doill_         J. D. Mac
                                                             Kay.

 Blue Ribbon, The (the        _Riobain Gorm nan Granndach_
   Grants)

 Blue Ribbon, The (Isle of    _Riobain Gorm an Eilein
   Mull)                        Mhuilich_

 Boat Tune, The               _Port a’ Bhàta_

 Boisdale Salute, The         _Fàilte Fir Bhaosdail_

 Borlum’s Salute, The Laird   _Fàilte Thighearna Bhorluim_
   of

 Breadalbane, Lament for Lord _Cumha Morair Braidalbainn_

 Brothers’ Lament, The        _Cumha nam Bràithrean_


 Cameron, Donald, Lament for  _Cumha Dhomhnuill Chamaroin_ K. Cameron,
                                                             1893.

 Camerons’ Gathering, The     _Cruinneachadh nan
                                Camaronach_

 Campbell, G., of Calder’s    _Fàilte Sheòrais òig
   Salute                       Tighearna Chaladair_

 Campbell of Kintarbet’s      _Fàilte Mhic Néill Chinn-    J. Mac Kay,
   Salute, Lachlan Mac Neill    tairbeart_                   Snr., 1837.

 Carles wi’ the Breeks, The   _Bodaich nam Briogaisean_

 Carles of Sligachin, The     _Bodaich Shligeachain_

 Catherine’s Lament           _Cumha Chatriona_

 Catherine’s Salute           _Fàilte Chatriona_

 Castle Menzie or Fraser’s    _Caisteal a’ Mheinneirich—
   Salute                       Piobaireachd Uaidh, Fàilte
                                Cloinn Shimidh_

 Charich’s, Alastair, March   _Spaidsearachd Alastair
                                Charaich_

 Cheerful Scotland            _Albainn Bheadarach_

 Children, The Lament for the _Cumhna na Cloinne_          P.M. Mac
                                                             Crimmon.

 Chisholm’s Salute            _Fàilte ’n t-Siosolaich_

 Chisholm of Strathglass’s    _Fàilte Siosalach Srath-
   Salute                       Ghlais_

 Choaig, Patrick, A Satire on _Lasan Phadruig Chaoig Mhic  D.M. Mac
                                Cruimein_                    Crimmon.

 Ciar, Lament for John        _Cumha Iain Chéir_

 Ciar, Salute for John        _Fàilte Iain Chéir_

 Clan Chattan, The Gathering  _Cruinneachadh Chloinn
   of                           Chatain_

 Clan Ranald’s Salute         _Fàilte Chloinn Raonuill_

 Claverhouse, Lament for      _Cumha Chléibheir_

 Cleaver, General, Lament for _Cumha Chléibheir_           1689.
   (?) Claverhouse

 Comely Tune, The             _Ant-Ailteachd_

 Company’s Lament, The        _Cumha na Cuideachd_

 Contullich, Lament for the   _Cumha Fir Chontullaich_     1714.
   Laird of

 Craigellachie, The Grants’   _Creag Ealachaidh_
   Gathering

 Crun-luath Tune, The         _Port a’ Chrunluaith_


 Daughter, Lament for the     _Cumha na h-ìghne_

 Davidson of Tulloch’s Salute _Fàilte Tighearna Thulaich_

 Dead, Lament for the         _Cumha nam Marbh_

 Desperate Battle Cuchulin,   _Cath fuasach Chuchulinn_
   The

 Donald Gruamach’s Lament for _Spaidsearachd Dhomhnuill    D. Gruamach.
   his elder Brother            Ghruamaich_

 Doyle’s, Lady, Salute        _Fàilte Bain-Tighearna       J. Mac Kay.
                                Dhoile_

 Drizzle on the Stone         _Ceob air cloich_            R. Mac
                                                             Dougal.

 Duke of Perth’s March, The   _Spaidsearachd Dhiùc         Finlay _Dubh_
                                Pheairt_                     Mac Rae,
                                                             1715.

 Duncan Mac Rae of Kintail’s  _Cumha Dhonnachaidh Mhic
   Lament                       Iain_

 Duntroon’s Salute            _Fàilte Dhùntròin_

 Duntroon’s Warning           _Caismeachd Dhuntroin_

 Dunyveg, Lament for the      _Cumha Caisteal Dhun-        1647.
   Castle of                    Naomhaig_


 Earl of Ross’s March, The    _Spaidsearachd Iarla Rois_   D. M. Mac
                                                             Crimmon,
                                                             1600.

 Earl of Seaforth’s Salute    _Fàilte Uilleam Duibh Mhic   Finlay _Dubh_
                                Coinnich_                    Mac Rae,
                                                             1715.

 Elchies Salute, or Mac Nab’s _Fàilte Elchin, na Fàilte
   Salute,                      Chloinn an Aba_

 End of the Great Bridge, The _Ceann na Drochaide mòire_

 End of Isheberry Bridge, The _Ceann Drochaid Iseberri_

 End of the Little Bridge     _Ceann na Drochaide bige_    1645.

 Ewen of the Battles          _Eoghan nan cath_

 Extirpation of the Tinkers,  _Sgrios nan Ceàird_
   The


 Fair Honey                   _A mhil bhraonach_

 Fairy Flag, The              _A’ bhratach Shìth_

 Fare thee well, Donald       _Soiridh leat a Dhómhnuill_

 Finger Lock, The             _A’ Ghlas Mheur_

 Finlay’s Lament              _Cumha Fhiounlaidh_

 Forbes, Lament for Colonel   _Cumha Chorneil Forbes_      D. Fraser.

 Frenzy of Meeting, The (or   _Faoin Bhaile na Coinneimh_  J. Mac Kay,
   Lament for Brian O’Duff)                                  or Donald
                                                             Mac Dougal.

 Frisky Lover, The            _An Suiriche sîogach_

 Fuinachair                   _Fiunnachair_


 Glen is mine, The            _’S leam fheim an Gleann_

 Glengarry, Lament for        _Cumha Mhic-Alastair_        A. Munro.

 Glengarry’s March            _Cille Chriosda_

 Gordon’s Salute, The         _Fàilte nan Gordonach_

 Gower, Lament for Lord Fred  _Cumha Morair F. L. Gobhair_
   Leveson

 Grain in Hides and Corn in   _Grain an Seicheannan ’s
   Sacks                        siol am pocannan_

 Great Supper, Lament for the _Cumha na Suipearach móire_  Mac Dougal.

 Groat, The                   _An Gròta_

 Gunn’s Salute                _Fàilte nan Guineach_


 Hail to my Country           _Fàilte do m’ dhùthaich_     Ed. June,
                                                             1896.

 Half-Finished Piobaireachd,  _Am Port leathach_           P. M. Mac
   The                                                       Crimmon and
                                                             J. D. Mac
                                                             Kay.

 Hamilton, Lament for the     _Cumha Dhiùc Hamiltoin_
   Duke of

 Harp Tree, Lament for the    _Cumha Craobh nan teud_

 Hen’s March o’er the Midden, _Glocail nan cearc_          John Dall Mac
   The                                                       Kay.

 Hey! for the old Pipes       _Dastriom gu’n seinnam piob_

 Highland Society of London’s _Fàilte Comunn Gaidhealach   John Mac Kay.
   Salute, The                  Lunainn_

 Highland Society of          _Fàilte Commun Gaidhealach   Prof. Mac
   Scotland’s Salute, The       Albainn_                     Arthur,
                                                             1796.


 I got a kiss of the King’s   _Fhuair mi pòg o laimh an    D. M. Mac
   hand                         Righ_                        Crimmon,
                                                             1651.

 Inveraray, Salute to         _Fàilte Ionaraora_

 Inverness                    _Inbhirneis_

 Islay, Farewell to the Laird _Soraidh Tighearna Ileath_   A. Mac Kay,
   of                                                        1840.

 Isle of Skye                 _Eilean a’ Cheo_             a Mac Crimmon


 James VI.’s Salute           _Cumha Righ Seumas an
                                seathamh_


 King George III., Lament for _Cumha Righ Seoras a tri_

 King James’ Departure,       _Siubhal Sheumais_           1688.
   Lament for

 King’s Taxes, The            _Màl an Righ_

 Kinloch Moidart’s Salute     _Fàilte Fir Cheannloch-
                                Mùideart_

 Kinloch Muideart—Lament for  _Fàilte Fir Cheannloch-
   Mac Donald of                Mùideart_


 Laggan Salute, The           _Fàilte Lagain_              D. Mac Kay,
                                                             1871.

 Laird of Anapool, Lament for _Cumha Fir Anapuil_
   the

 Lament for Abercairney       _Cumha Aberchàrnaig_

 Leaving Kintyre              _Fàgail Chinntire_

 Leigh, Col., Farewell to     _Soraidh Chòirneil Leigh_    C. S.
                                                             Thomason,
                                                             1893.

 Little Finger Tune, The      _Port na Lùdaig_

 Little Spree, The            _An Daorach bheag_

 Little Supper, Lament for    _An t-Suipear bheag_
   the

 Loch Carron-point, The       _Blàr an t-Srian_            1602.
   Battle of

 Lord Lovat, Lament for       _Cumha Mhic Shimidh_

 Mac Cruimein, Donald Ban,    _Cumha Dhòmhnuill Bhain Mhic
   Lament for                   Cruimein_

 Mac Cruimein, Patrick Og,    _Cumha Phàdruig Oig Mhic     J. D. Mac
   Lament for                   Cruimein_                    Kay.

 Mac Cruimein will never      _Cha till, cha till, cha     D. B. Mac
   return                       till mi tuille_              Crimmon,
                                                             1746.

 Mac Cruimein’s Sweetheart    _Mal Dhonn_

 Mac Donald of the Isles,     _Cumha an Ridire Seumas Mac  C. Mac
   Lament for Sir James         Dhomhnuill nan Eilean_       Arthur.

 Mac Donald of the Isles,     _Cumha an Ridire Seumas Mac  W. Mac Donald
   Lament for Sir James         Dhomhnuill nan Eilean_       of Vallay.

 Mac Donald of the Isles      _Fàilte Mhic Dhòmhnuill nan
   Salute                       Eilean_

 Mac Donald of the Isles, Sir _Failte an Ridire Seumas Mac
   James, Salute                Dhòmhnuill nan Eilean_

 Mac Donald, Lament for Lady  _Cumha Bain-tighearna Mhic   Angus Mac
                                Dhomhnuill_                  Arthur,
                                                             1790.

 Mac Donald, Lord, Lament for _Cumha Morair Chloinn        A. Mac
                                Dhomhnuill_                  Arthur,
                                                             1796

 Mac Donald of Morar, Ronald, _Cumha Raonuill Mhic Ailein
   Lament for                   óig_

 Mac Donald’s, Angus, Assault _Ionnsaidh Aonghais Bhig
                                Mhic Dhomhnuill_

 Mac Donalds are simple, The  _Tha Clann Dòmhnuill
                                socharach_

 Mac Donalds of Clanranald’s  _Cruinneachadh Chloinn       1715.
   gathering at Sheriffmuir     Roonuill (Sliabh an t-
                                Siorra)_

 Mac Donalds of Clan Ronald,  _Cnocan Ailean Mhic Iain_
   The Gathering of the

 Mac Donald’s, Lady Margaret, _Fàilte Bain-tighearna
   Salute                       Mairearad_

 Mac Donalds, March of the    _Spaidsearachd Mhic
                                Dhòmhnuill_

 Mac Donald’s Salute, Lady    _Fàilte Bain-tighearna Mhic
   Margaret                     Dhomhnuill_

 Mac Donalds’ Salute, The     _Fàilte Chloinn Domhnuill_   D. M. Mac
                                                             Crimmon.

 Mac Donalds, The Parading of _Uaill Chloinn Dòmhnuill_
   the

 Mac Donald’s Tutor           _Oide-ionnsachaidh Mhic
                                Dhòmhnuill_

 Mac Donell, Alex., of        _Cumha Alastair Dheirg_
   Glengarry’s Lament

 Mac Donell of Laggan’s       _Cumha Dhomhnuill an Lagain_
   Lament,

 Mac Dougall, Lament for      _Cumha Chaiptein ’Ic         Ronald Mac
   Captain                      Dhughaill_                   Dougall.

 Mac Dougall’s Salute, The    _Fàilte Chloinn Dùghaill_    R. Mac
                                                             Dougall.

 Mac Duffs’ Gathering, The    _Cruinneachadh Chloinn
                                Duibh_

 Mac Farlanes’ Gathering, The _’Thogail nam bò_

 Mac Gregors’ Gathering, The  _Cruinneachadh nan
                                Griogarach_

 Mac Intosh, Lament for       _Cumha Mhic an Toisich_

 Mac Intoshs’ Banner, The     _Bratach Mhic an Toisich_

 Mac Intyre’s Salute          _Fàilte Mhic an t-saoir_

 Mac Kays’ Banner, The        _Bratach Chloinn Mhic Aoidh_

 Mac Kay’s, Donald Dugal,     _Cumha Dhomhnuill Dhughail   D. M. Mac
   Lament, or Lord Reay’s       Mhic Aoidh_                  Crimmon
   Lament,

 Mac Kays’ March, The         _Spaidsearachd Cloinn Mhic
                                Aoidh_

 Mac Kenzie of Applecross’s   _Fàilte Tighearna na         A. Mac Kay.
   Salute                       Coimirich_

 Mac Kenzie, Donald—his       _Cumha Dhòmhnuill Mhic
   Father’s Lament for          Coinnich (le’Athair)_

 Mac Kenzie of Gairloch’s     _Cumha Tighearna Gheárloch_  J. Mac Kay.
   Lament,

 Mac Kenzie of Gairloch’s     _Fàilte Thigearna Gheàrloch_
   Salute

 Mac Kenzie, Lament for Colin _Cumha Chailein Ruaidh Mhic
   Roy                          Coinnich_

 Mac Kenzie’s, Capt. D.,      _Cumha ’Chaiptein D. Mhic
   Lament                       Coinnich_

 Mac Kenzies’ Gathering, The  _Tulloch Ard_

 Mac Kenzies’ Gathering, The— _Cruinneachadh Chloinn
   Tulloch Ard                  Choinnich (Tulloch Ard)_

 Mac Lean, Great John, Lament _Cumha Ian Ghairbh Mhic
   for                          Illeathain_

 Mac Lean of Coll, Lament for _Cumha Iain Ghairbh Mhic
   Sir John Garve               ’Illeathain_

 Mac Lean, Lachlan Mor,       _Latha Sron a’ Chlachain_
   Lament for

 Mac Leans’ Gathering, The    _Cruinneachadh Chloinn
                                Ghilleathain_

 Mac Leans’ Gathering, The    _Spaidsearachd Chloinn
                                Ghilleathain_

 Mac Lean’s, Hector, Warning  _Caismeachd Eachain Mhic     1579.
                                Ailein nan Sop_

 Mac Leans’ March, The        _Spaidsearachd Chloinn
                                Ghilleathain_

 Mac Lean, Lament for Hector  _Cumha Eachainn Ruaidh nan   A. Mac Lean,
   Roy,                         cath_                        1650.

 Mac Leod, A Taunt on         _Port Geàrr Mhic Leòid_

 Mac Leod of Colbeek, Lament  _Cumha Mhic Leòid Cholbec_   J. Mac Kay.
   for

 Mac Leod, dispraise of,      _Di-moladh Mhic Leòid_

 Mac Leod of Gesto’s Salute   _Fàilte Fir Gêosta_

 Mac Leod John, Lament for,   _Cumha Iain Mhic Iain
                                Ghairbh_

 Mac Leod of Mac Leod, Lament _Cumha cinn-cinnidh nan      D. M. Mac
   for                          Leòdach_                     Crimmon,
                                                             1626.

 Mac Leod of Mac Leod’s       _Port Iomram Mhic Leòid, na  D. M. Mac
   Rowing Pibroch or Salute     Fàilte nan Leòdach_          Crimmon.

 Mac Leod, Mary, Lament for   _Cumha Màiri Nic Leòid_

 Mac Leod of Raasay, John     _Cumha Iain Ghairbh Mhic     P. M. Mac
   Garve, Lament for            Gille Chaluim_               Crimmon,
                                                             1548 (?)

 Mac Leod of Raasay’s lament  _Cumha Mhic Gille Chaluim    D. M. Mac
                                Rathasadh_                   Crimmon,
                                                             1648.

 Mac Leod of Raasay’s Salute  _Fàilte Mhic Gille Chaluim   A. Mac Kay,
                                Rathasadh_                   Gairloch.

 Mac Leod, Roderick More,     _’Nann air mhire tha sibh?_  P. M. Mac
   Salute at Birth of                                        Crimmon,
                                                             1715.

 Mac Leod of Tallisker’s,     _Fàilte Bain Tigearna
   Mrs., Salute                 Thailasgear_

 Mac Leod of Tallisker’s      _Failte Tighearna
   Salute                       Thailesgear_

 Mac Leod’s Controversy       _Iomradh Mhic Leòid_         D. M. Mac
                                                             Crimmon,
                                                             1503.

 Mac Neill of Barra’s Lament  _Cumha Mhic Nèill Bhara_

 Mac Neill of Barra’s March   _Spaidsearachd Mhic Nèill
                                Bhara_

 Mac Neill of Kintarbert’s    _Aon tlachd Mhic Nèill_
   Fancy

 Mac Phees, The Rout of the   _Ruaig air Cloinn a Phi_

 Mac Pherson’s March, Cluny   _Spaidsearachd Thighearna
                                Chluainidh_

 Mac Pherson’s Salute, Cluny  _Fàilte Fir Chluainidh_

 Mac Raes’ March, The         _Spaidsearachd Cloinn Mhic   1491.
                                Rath_

 Mac Suain of Roaig, Lament   _Cumha Mhic Shuain á Roaig_
   for

 Maolroy, The Battle of, or   _A mhuinntir a cháil chaoil
   Isabel Mac Kay               thugadh am bruthach oirbh_

 Mary’s praise for her Gift   _Moladli Màiri_

 Massacre of Glencoe          _Mort Ghlinne Comhann_

 Melbank’s Salute             _Fàilte Fir Bhlabhne_

 Menzies’ Salute, The         _Fàilte ’Mhèinneirich_

 Men went to drink, The       _Chaidh na fir a dh’òl_

 Middling Spree, The          _An Daorach mheadhonach_

 Monros’ Salute, The          _Fàilte nan Rothach_

 My dearest on earth, give me _Thoir domh pòg, a luaidh mo
   your kiss                    chridhe_

 My King has landed in        _Thàinig mo Righ air tir am
   Moidart                      Mùideart_


 Old Sword’s Lament, The      _Cumha an tseana
                                Chlaidheimh_

 Old Woman’s Lullaby, The     _Crònain na Cailliche_

 Only Son, Lament for the     _Cumha an aona mhic_         P. M. Mac
                                                             Crimmon.


 Park, Battle of              _Blàr Pairc Shruithleith_    1477.

 Pass of Crieff, Battle of    _Cath bealach Chraoibh_
   the

 Perth, The Desperate Battle  _Cath fuathasach, Pheairt_   1395.

 Perth, Lament for the Duke   _Cumha Dhuic Pheairt_
   of

 Piper Samuel, Lament for     _Cumha Shomhairle Dhuibh_

 Piper’s Farewell to his      _Soraidh piobaire da
   Home, The                    dhachaidh_

 Piper’s Salute to his        _Fàilte a’ Phìobaire d’a
   Master, The                  Mhaighstir_

 Piper’s warning to his       _A Cholla mo run_
   Master, The

 Praise of Marion             _Moladh Màiri_

 Pretty Dirk, The             _A ’Bhiodag bhòidheach_

 Prince Charles’ Lament       _Cumha Phrionnsa Teàrlach_   Capt. M. Mac
                                                             Leod, 1746.

 Prince’s Salute, The         _Fàilte’ Phrionnsa_          J. Mac
                                                             Intyre,
                                                             1715.


 Queen Anne, Lament for       _Cumha Ban-Righ Anna_


 Red Hand in the Mac Donald’s _Lamh dhearg Chloinn
   Arms, The                    Domhnuill_

 Red Hill, The Battle of the  _Fir nam breacan dubha_

 Red Ribbon, The              _An riobain dearg_

 Robertson’s Salute, Strowan  _Fàilte Thighearna Struain_

 Rout of Glen Fruin, The      _Ruaig Ghlinn Fraoine_       1602.

 Rout of the Lowland Captain, _Ruaig a’Chaiptein Ghallda_
   The


 Sauntering, The              _A Chracaireachd_

 Scarce of Fishing            _Spiocaireachd Iasgaich_

 Sheriffmuir, The Battle of   _Blár Sliabh an t-Siorra_    J. Mac
                                                             Intyre,
                                                             1715.

 Sinclairs’ March, The        _Spaidsearachd Mhic na
                                Ceàrda_

 Sisters’ Lament, The         _Cumha na peathar_

 Sobieski’s Salute            _Fàilte Shobia-gaidh_

 Smith’s, Mrs., Salute        _Fàilte Bean a’Ghobha_       J. B. Mac
                                                             Kenzie.

 Strone, The Battle of Castle _Blàr Chaisteal Stroìne_

 Stuarts’ White Banner, The   _Bratach Bhán nan
                                Stiubhartach_

 Sutherlands’ Gathering, The  _Cruinneachadh nan
                                Sutharlanach_


 Tallisker, The Battle of     _Blàr Thailesgear_
   Waternish

 Thomason’s, Miss Mabel,      _Fàilte na h-òighe Mabal nic K. Cameron,
   Salute                       Thòmais_                     1894.

 Thomason’s Salute, General   _Fàilte an t-seanaileir Mhic A. Paterson,
                                Thòmais_                     H.L.I.,
                                                             1893.

 Too long in this condition   _’Sfada mar so tha sinn_     P. M. Mac
                                                             Crimmon,
                                                             1715.

 Tune of Strife, The          _Port an Strìth_


 Union, Lament for the        _An Co-chomunn_

 Unjust Carceration, The      _An ceapadh eucorach_        J. Dall Mac
                                                             Kay.


 Vaunting, The                _A’Bhòilich_                 Rd. Mac
                                                             Donald of
                                                             Morair.


 Waking of the Bridegroom,    _Dùsgadh Fir-na-Bainnse_
   The

 War or Peace                 _Cogadh na sith_

 Waterloo, The Battle of      _Blár Bhaterlù_              J. Mac Kay,
                                                             1815.

 Weighing from Land           _Togail bho tìr_

 Welcome Johnnie back again   _Slàn gu’n till Eoinachan_

 Writer, Lament for the       _Cumha ’Chleirich_


 Young King George III.       _Fàilte Sheòrais òig_        1760.
   Salute

 Young Laird of Dungallon’s   _Fàilte Thighearna Oig
   Salute                       Dhungallain_

 Young Neill’s Salute         _Fàilte Neill Oig_

 You’re welcome, Ewin Lochiel _Is e do bheatha Eòghain_

With nineteen pibrochs, of which name and date and composers are all
alike unknown.


                       VII.—THE GARB OF OLD GAUL.

              (From the _Glasgow Herald_, April 7, 1900).

           “Oh first of garbs! garment of happy fate,
           So long employed, of such an antique date,
           Look back some thousand years till records fail,
           And lose themselves in some romantic tale;
           We’ll find our god-like fathers nobly scorned
           To be by any other dress adorned.”
                                             —_Allan Ramsay._

The “quelt,” as very ancient writers called it, is one of the few things
that are left to remind Scotland of its once distinctive nationality.
Together with the Gaelic and the pipes, it makes Scottish history
peculiar among the histories of countries. In no other land have the
distinguishing marks of a nationality that, as a separate kingdom, has
ceased to exist been retained in almost all their original purity. Of
the three things, the kilt is perhaps the most interesting. The language
and the music have been, and are, confined to the people of the
Highlands, either in or out of the Highlands; but the kilt, while no
longer the everyday wear of Highland people, has found its way into non-
Highland circles, and the tartan has become a fashionable dress. But
still, and this is a peculiar thing, it remains the Highland garb, and
must, wheresoever seen, be associated with a distinctive country and a
distinctive people.

The kilt is the most ancient of all garments. It is the development of
the fig leaves of our first parents. Primitive man wrapped himself round
with a piece of cloth, when he had cloth, caring little about the
niceties of cut or fashion. When the cloth didn’t hang properly he,
quite naturally, tied it round his waist with a string, and in so doing
transformed his wrappings into a belted plaid, the immediate predecessor
of the plaid and kilt. It was certainly not a sense of delicacy but a
desire for outward show that led primitive man to clothe himself. Cæsar
found the Britons with their bodies painted with woad, and they appeared
naked in public. Afterwards they clothed themselves with skins of
animals and with woollen garments, the latter of which was undoubtedly
the string-bound plaid of the well-to-do Highlander.

The earliest bit of evidence regarding the antiquity of the Highland
dress in anything like its present form is a piece of sculpture which
was dug in 1860 from part of the ruins of the wall of Antoninus, built
in A.D. 140. It shows figures representing very clearly the plaid and
kilt, presumably in one piece. Another sculptured stone, found at Dull,
Perthshire, gives the bonnet and shield of the Highlander; while a
third, discovered at St. Andrews, shows the arrangement of the belted
plaid or full dress of the ancient Gael. Both the latter, now in the
Museum of Antiquaries, Edinburgh, are of unknown antiquity. Then in A.D.
204 we find Herodian, a classical writer, saying that the Caledonians
were only partly clad; and in A.D. 296 a Roman writer, in a eulogy of
the Emperor Constantinus, calls the Picts _hostilibus seminudis_, half-
clad enemies. European historians, as a matter of fact, almost always
called the Gael of Alban half-naked. Besides, we have Gildas, the
earliest of British writers, saying that the Picts were dressed only
with cloth round the loins, a rude form of the plaid evidently. And,
while both Cæsar and Tacitus assure us that the Britons were precisely
the same people as the Gauls, in manners, religion, appearance, and
customs, we also read, in other writings of the same date, that the
Gauls “wore coats stained with various colours.” Also as a very ancient
writer on Scotland tells us:—

  “The other pairt Northerne are full of mountaines, and very rud and
  hornelie kind of people doeth inhabite, which is called Reid Schankes,
  or Wyld Scottish. They be clothed with ane mantle, with ane schirt
  fachioned after the Irish manner, going bare-legged to the knie.”

These things all indicate a people partially clad in cloth which was not
all of one colour, and it is not stretching the inference very far to
identify the garb with the latter-day dress of the Scottish Highlander.

Let us come now to times of which more or less authentic history treats.
The first historical reference we find is contained in the Icelandic
Sagas. When the death of Malcolm Canmore plunged Scotland into anarchy,
Magnus Olafson, King of Norway, was ravaging the west coast and securing
a firm hold of the Hebrides for his own country. On his return from that
expedition in 1093, the Sagas relate, he adopted the costume of these
western lands, and “his followers went bare-legged, having short kirtles
and upper wraps, and so men called him ‘Barelegs.’” The seal of
Alexander I., whose reign began in 1107, shows him in Highland dress,
and as the same seal was used by David I. (1124) and Malcolm IV. (1153),
we are quite justified in concluding that these monarchs actually wore
what they were represented on their seal as wearing. Such a dress must
certainly have existed at that time.

Then, dating from 1350, we have a sculptured representation of a chief
attired finely in Highland dress, and in 1471 John, Bishop of Glasgow,
treasurer to King James III., in an account for tartan for the use of
the King, gives the following item:—“For a yard and a half, £1 10s.
(Scots of course), and the colour blue.” Half a yard of “double tartane”
for the Queen cost 8s. James V. made a hunting expedition into the
Highlands in 1538, and a Highland dress was provided for the occasion.
The account of the King’s treasurer shows that it consisted of “a short
Highland coit,” hose of “tertane,” and a “syde Heland sarkis,” all for
the “Kingis Grace.” The last article was presumably an unusually long
shirt.

John Lesley, Bishop of Ross, writing in 1578, says the garments of his
day consisted of a short woollen jacket and a covering of the simplest
kind for the thighs, more for decency than for protection from cold.
About 1580 a writer with a turn for rhyming described the dress of the
Highlanders thus:—

               “Their shirtes be very straunge,
                 Not reaching past the thigh,
               With pleates on pleates they pleated are,
                 As thick as pleates can lie,”

which was a very good and concise description of the plaid as it then
was. Another writer, in _Certayne Mattere Concerning Scotland_,
published in London in 1603, says the Highlanders “delight in marbled
cloths, especially that have long strips of sundrie colours ... with the
which, rather coloured than clad, they suffer the most cruel tempests
that blow in the open fields, in such sort that, in a night of snow they
sleep sound.” From _A Modern Account of Scotland_, printed in 1679, also
in London, we learn that “the Highlanders wear slashed doublets,
commonly without breeches, only a plad tyed about their wastes, thrown
over one shoulder, with short stockings to the gartering place; their
knees and part of their thighs being naked; others have breeches and
stockings all of a piece of plad ware.” A writer of 1710 supplements
this by saying, “they wear striped mantles of divers colours called
plaids”; a statement which brings the evidence to a date so recent as to
render the calling of further witnesses unnecessary. That the kilt is a
pure outgrowth of Scottish life there is no gainsaying. It could have
been imported from Ireland only, and that it was not is proved by the
two facts, that the colony of Irish Scots who settled in Argyllshire
never overran Scotland, and that the checkered plaid was worn in
Scotland at dates earlier than it can be proved to have been worn in
Ireland.

The complete outfit of a Highland chief in the middle of the eighteenth
century makes rather a formidable list. Here it is:—

               Full-trimmed bonnet.
               Tartan jacket, vest, kilt, and cross-belt.
               Tartan belted plaid.
               Pair of hose, made up from cloth.
               Tartan stockings, with yellow garters.
               Two pairs of brogues.
               Silver-mounted purse and belt.
               Target with spear.
               Broadsword.
               Pair of pistols and bullet mould.
               Dirk.
               Knife and fork.

The garb was completed by a feather, or, in the case of the common
people, a tuft of heather, pine, holly, or oak, in the bonnet. Personal
decoration was always considered a more important matter than home
decoration or even home comforts.

Hair was used for making clothing at one time, for we are told Ossian
Fin Mac Coul was “arrayed in Hieland plaidis of hair,” but wool was the
general material, and so long as wool was worn, so long—it is said—was
rheumatism unknown in the Highlands. In colours green and black
predominated, with an occasional stripe of red. The number of colours
indicated the rank of the wearer, a King or a Chief having seven, a
Druid six, and other nobles four, while the very poor people had their
plaids plain. The dyes were got from herbs, and the colours are said to
have been so “fast” as to keep for two hundred years. The Celts were
proud of the grandeur of their tartans, and an old song makes one of
them, when wooing a Lowland lass, say:—

               “Bra sall the sett o’ your braid tartan be
               If ye will gang to the Highlands wi’ me.”

The rigorous Disarming Act, passed in 1747, created what was perhaps the
most critical time in the history of the tartan. The pipes and the
tartan were banned as treasonable things, and marks of extreme
disloyalty to the House of Hanover. The law expressly enacted that
“neither man nor boy, except such as are employed as officers and
soldiers, shall, on any pretence, wear or put on the clothes commonly
called Highland clothes, viz., the plaid, philabeg or little kilt,
trowse, shoulder-belts, or any part whatsoever of what peculiarly
belongs to the Highland garb, and that no tartan or party-coloured plaid
or stuff shall be used for greatcoats, or for upper coats, on pain of
imprisonment for six months, without the option of a fine, for the first
offence, and transportation for seven years for the second.” This was
stringent enough, and it nearly strangled all that was peculiar to the
Highlands. But, thanks principally to the patriotic exertions of the
then Duke of Montrose, the ban was removed in 1782, and the Highland
garb restored to favour. It is now worn by five British regiments. The
Gordons wear the Gordon tartan, the Camerons the Erracht-Cameron, the
Seaforths the Mac Kenzie, the Argyll and Sutherlands the Sutherland, and
the Black Watch a special tartan closely resembling the Sutherland. Both
battalions of the Gordons, and one each of the other four regiments, are
now in South Africa.

The Highland garb as we have it to-day is a compound of three varieties,
all of which were worn in the seventeenth century. There was first the
dress worn by the gentry—a shirt died with saffron and a plaid of fine
wool tartan, with colours assorted so as to give the best possible
effect. Then there was the dress of the common people—a shirt, painted
instead of dyed, with a deerskin jacket above it, and the plaid, not
always of tartan, worn over the shoulders instead of belted about the
body. The third variety was the trews, but this cannot be traced farther
back than 1538. It probably came from Ireland, where it was the dress of
the gentry from the earliest periods.

The plaid proper consisted of a long piece of tartan carefully plaited
in the middle and bound about the waist in large and very particularly-
adjusted folds. While the lower part came down from the belt to the
knees, the upper, after various wrappings so as to cover the whole body,
was fixed to the left shoulder with a brooch, leaving the right arm at
liberty. In wet weather the plaid was thrown loose, and formed a
complete covering for the body. The headdress, when there was any, was a
round, flat bonnet, the stockings were cut from the web of tartan, and
the shoes were made of skin shaped in the best possible way to the form
of the foot. The original of the sporran was a large piece of goat’s or
badger’s skin profusely ornamented, which hung in front, and served as a
pocket.

There seems to have been a time, before the dress developed into its
present form, when the belted plaid and the trews were worn together. In
1656 a certain Thomas Tucker, who reported on the settlement of the
revenues of excise and custom in Scotland, says one of his collectors,
in order to avert the antipathy of the natives to an exciseman, “went
clad after the mode of the country, with belted playde, trowses, and
brogues.” “In sharp winters,” says a writer of 1680, “they wear close
trouzes, which cover the thighs, legs, and feet;” while at the Battle of
Killiecrankie, in 1715, “there were several of the common men died in
the hills, for, having cast away their plaids at going into battle, they
had not wherewith to cover them but their shirts; whereas many of the
gentlemen that instead of short hose did wear trewis, though they were
sorely pinched, did fare better in their short coats and trewis than
those that were naked to the belt.”

By and by, however, the belted plaid and the trews gave way to the plaid
and the kilt as we now have them. It cannot be said, indeed, that there
ever was a period in which the trews held anything like universal sway.
The transition was rather from the original form of the loosely wrapped
plaid to the present form of the dress. There is a story to the effect
that an English tailor named Parkinson or Ralliston invented the kilt in
1715 or 1745—it is a somewhat vague story—and both Pennant and Sir John
Sinclair accept it as truth. Pennant, himself an Englishman, may be
excused, but the man who edited the _Statistical Account of Scotland_
might have known better. The Earl of Moray of Charles I.’s day wore the
kilt, and Lord Archibald Campbell, in _Records of Argyll_, shows two
pictures, one of 1672 and one of 1693, in both of which the kilt can be
plainly seen. Besides, the Highlanders wore it in the rebellion of 1715.
It is carrying conjecture a bit too far to contend that the Saxons, who
were able to introduce very few of their customs among the Celts,
introduced the national dress. The simple fact seems to be that the
change from the belted plaid, with the plaid and trews here and there,
to the plaid and kilt, took place when the altering circumstances of the
people made continuous labour a necessity, and also, therefore, a
convenient and inexpensive working outfit.

It gives one an insight into the habits of the times to read that the
managers of the piping competition held in Edinburgh in 1783, apologised
to the public for the deficiency in dress. The competitors, they said,
having no prospect of appearing “before so magnificent and great a
company,” had nothing in view in quitting their distant dwellings but
the competition at Falkirk, where their instruments alone were
essential. In 1785, however, candidates were warned to appear “in the
proper Highland habit,” which has since held good. Pipers’ dress was
sometimes stylish enough even in the middle of the eighteenth century,
for we read that in a procession of the Royal Company of Archers in
Edinburgh in 1734 there was “one Highland piper who was dressed in
scarlet richly laced.”

In the present-day dress, as is well known, the upper part of the plaid
is disjoined from the lower, and made up so as to resemble the ancient
form. The kilt itself is plaited so as to resemble the lower half of the
plaid, but as a matter of fact, it is always too well plaited to be more
than a far-off imitation. When properly made, the garb is certainly one
of the most picturesque in the world. It is not so well adapted for the
hillside as the old was, having been “improved” too much, but it is
remarkable as showing how closely mankind clings to habits and costumes
which experience has proved suitable, and which is entwined into the
history and traditions of their particular race. As to its suitability
for war, a great deal has been said in connection with the present
operations in South Africa, and it has been laid to the charge of the
tartan that it not only betrays the presence of the wearer, and makes
him a target for the enemy’s sharp-shooters, but also exposes the
soldier to all sorts of chills, and the attacks of all the vermin that
crawl over the ground on which he has often to sleep. There is no use
denying the fact that there is a great deal of truth in this, and if the
Government press their proposals for the reform of Army dress, and
include in these proposals the abolition of the kilt as a fighting
garment, it seems as if there will not be one half the outcry there
would have been in the same circumstances before the war begun. The
campaign has undoubtedly revealed the shortcomings of the kilt as a part
of active service dress, but that is no reason why it should be
altogether abolished. Sentiment can be satisfied by retaining the kilt
for parade purposes and garrison duty, while common-sense will indicate
that sentiment, unless it can be proved to be very strong indeed, must
have little voice in deciding what is best in the face of the enemy. It
would certainly be bad policy to totally dissociate the Highland
regiments from their distinctive tartans. Recruiting in Scotland is not
what it might be, and when the Highland regiments cease to be
distinctively Highland it will decline still further. If the authorities
wish to foster the military enthusiasm of Highlanders they cannot do
better than foster all that pertains to their part of the kingdom.
Besides, the tartan is not now the badge of a rebellious remnant, but of
a race that is loyal to the empire of which it is a worthy part, and
considering the high position the kilted regiments hold in the British
army, it is not too much to expect that their peculiar dress should be
left to them, for use in all possible circumstances.

The war has given a decided impetus to the general trade in tartans. The
demand from the regulars remains practically stationary, as the number
of men wearing the Highland uniform is always the same. Among Scottish
Volunteer regiments, however, the kilt is coming more and more into
favour, and quite a number of additional “Highland companies” have been
formed recently. The 6th V. B. Gordon Highlanders is the only battalion
in the Highland Brigade unprovided with the national garb, the
Government having, owing to “financial difficulties,” declined to supply
the dress. The honorary colonel, Mr. J. Gordon Smith, has, however, now
given the regiment £1500 to enable the men to wear their territorial
uniform, and it is almost certain that the Government will supply the
regiment with the kilt in the future. But it is from fashionable civil
life that the bulk of the increased demand comes. The headquarters of
the kilt-making industry—for it is an industry—are in Glasgow, but the
principal market is in London. The demand in the Metropolis for the
Highland dress is very extensive, and the biggest firm of Glasgow
manufacturers are kept continually employed fulfilling orders from the
South. The favourite tartans are, naturally, those of the kilted
regiments, but the fashionable Highland dress consists of the kilt with
an ordinary dinner jacket above it—the full outfit would be too Highland
for London drawing-rooms. In Scotland the formation of clan societies
has, in the cities, revived interest in the different tartans, but in
the real home of the kilt, the fastnesses of the Highlands, the dress is
practically extinct. A few old men wear it, as well as some of the
better class residents, visitors sometimes wear it, while retainers wear
it as a sort of livery; but among the people themselves it is, to all
intents and purposes, obsolete. The garb of old Gaul has ceased to be
the at-home dress of the Highlander, and become the evening dress of the
fashionable who would ape a Highland connection, and the mark of the
Highland wanderer, who far from home stands by home customs out of
patriotic love for his home land. We may regret the turn of events, but
there is no use blinking simple facts.—W. L. M.




                                 Index.


 Aberdeen, 171, 226

 Aberdeenshire, pipes in, 153

 “Abide with me” at Omdurman, 154

 _A Cholla mo run_, 92, 307, 311, 312

 Africa, engravings found in, 31

 _A Ghlas Mheur_, 76, 363

 Aiken, William, piper, 162

 Airdrie, 285

 _Albyn’s Anthology_, 321, 340

 Aldershot, 145

 Alexander, G. W., 138

 Alexandria, a Mac Crimmon in, 261

 Alister Mac Cholla Chiotaich, 311

 Allan, James, piper, 189

 Alloway’s Auld Haunted Kirk, 223

 Alma, pipes at, 128

 Altimarlach, battle of, 337

 American War, pipes in, 133

 _A mhic Iain mhic Sheumais_, 363

 Amoaful, battle of, 133

 _Am port leathach_, 352

 Anderson, Wm., 173

 Antiquaries, Scottish Society of, 116

 Antoninus, the Wall of, 15

 Antwerp, pageant in, 225

 Applecross, 278

 “Apprentice surpasses his master, The,” 351

 Arabian instrument, an, 31

 Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, the, 137, 216

 Argyllshire, a cave in, 250

 Argyllshire Highlanders, the, 136

 Argyll, the Earl of, 50

 Argyll, the eighth Duke of, 202

 Armadale, 263

 Armagh, fighting at, 51

 Arroyo-de-Molinos, pipes at, 128

 Arundel, Richard Earl of, 40

 Ashanti War, pipers in, 134, 138

 Assaye, battle of, 120, 129

 Assynt, 341

 Atbara, battle of the, 134

 Athenians and pipes, 35

 Atholl, excursion into, 20

 Atholl, Earl of, 343

 _Autobiography of a Scottish Borderer, The_, 179

 Awa’, Whigs, awa, 127

 Aytoun, Professor, 113


 Babylonian instruments, 31

 Bacon, Lord, 17

 Badenoch, 229;
   a piper of, 164

 Baird, Major William, 133

 Balaclava, the 93rd at, 125

 Balmoral, 291

 Balnaves, Henry, of Ardradour, 289

 Balrines, battle of, 50

 Bannockburn, battle of, 38, 116, 271

 Bannocks o’ Barley Meal, 140

 Barbreck, the laird of, 324

 Barra, the Mac Neills of, 16

 _Bealach na Broige_, battle of, 301

 Beauly, 90, 320

 _Beauties of Gaelic Poetry, The_, 315

 _Bean Sith_, 363

 Bellside, 275

 Bencuillein, battle of, 362

 _Ben Dorain_, 27

 Bennet, George, piper, 162

 Berwick, 194

 Bett, compiler of pipe music, 109

 Beverley, carvings at, 44, 156

 Biggar, 171

 Birse, the parish of, 361

 Black Chanter of Chattan, the, 228

 Blackie, Professor, 75, 85, 288, 316

 Black Watch pipers, 125, 133, 134, 137, 138, 154, 160, 220

 Black, William, 201, 288

 Blane, Neil, piper, 188

 _Blar lèine_ 363

 Bodaich nam Briogais, 355

 Bo’ness, carving found at, 34;
   witches burned at, 224

 _Bon Gaultier Ballads, The_, 113

 _Border Minstrelsy_, 178

 Borderers, the, 137

 Boreraig, 262, 263

 Botanic Gardens, Glasgow, 219

 Bothwell Bridge, battle of, 127, 326

 Boston, carvings at, 44

 Boyne Water, 208

 Braes of the Mist, the, 350

 Brahan Castle, 283

 Brakenrig, James, piper, 162

 Breac, Donald, piper, 343

 Breadalbane Gathering, the, 335

 Breadalbane Fencibles, the, 219

 Breadalbane, Marquis of, 278, 279, 291

 Bridgeton, the piper of, 188

 Britons and pipes, 21

 Brose and Butter, 140

 Broun, Edmond, piper, 162

 Brown, Major-General G., 136

 Brussels, pipes in, 46, 340

 Buchanan, George, 23, 46

 Burchhardt, W., 32

 Burns, Robert, 76, 99, 353

 Byron, quotation from, 122


 Calder, J. T., 255

 Cameron, Alexander, 281, 283, 284

 Cameron Highlanders, pipers of, 131, 134, 137, 215, 321

 Cameronians, the, 137, 219

 Cameron, Colin, 281, 283, 285

 Cameron, Donald, piper, 104, 277, 280, 284

 Cameron, Keith, 283

 Cameron of Lochiel, 321, 327, 343

 Camerons’ Gathering, 343, 345

 Campbell, Alexander, 340

 Campbells are Coming, 129, 210, 213, 312

 Campbell, Colonel, of the Seaforths, 121

 Campbell, Duncan, 285

 Campbell, Frederick, of Isla, 275, 277

 Campbells, hereditary pipers, 275

 Campbell, James C., Royal piper, 154

 Campbell, J. F., 16, 59, 105, 106, 107, 238, 364

 Campbell, Lord Archibald, 240

 Campbell, Lieut.-Col. of Glenlyon, 290

 Campbell, Sir Colin, 128, 207

 Campbell, Sir John of Glenorchy, 337

 _Caber Feidh_, 341

 Cairns, Thomas, piper, 162

 Cairo, occupation of, 220

 Caithness, pipes in, 159, 163, 242, 254, 336, 337, 339

 _Cailleach Liath Rarsair_, 246

 _Caimbeul, Iain Bàn_, 336

 _Caledonian Pocket Companion_, 321

 Cambrensis, Giraldus, 35, 62

 Candahar, Battle of, 132

 Canmore, Malcolm, 13, 356

 _Canntaireachd_, 87, 102

 Canterbury Tales, the, 40

 _Caraid nan Gaidheal_, 56

 Carles wi’ the Breeks, 335, 337

 Carrick, customs in, 158

 Cathkin, Rutherglen and, 256

 _Celtic Magazine, The_, 235, 273

 _Celtic Monthly, The_, 86, 131, 364

 _Ceol Mòr_, 79, 111

 _Cha till mi tuille_, 12, 313, 318

 Chaldean instruments, 31

 Chattan, the Clan, 40, 228, 304

 Chaucer, 40, 76

 Charlie, Prince, 52, 90, 113, 118, 121, 226, 227, 229, 266

 Charles I., King, 117

 Charles II., King, 329

 Chisholm, the, 228

 Cirencester, carvings in, 156

 _Clach-na-phiobair_, 128

 Clan Ranald’s March, 290

 Clarence, Duke of, 159

 Clark, George, piper, 129

 Clark, James, piper, 163

 Claverhouse, General, 127

 Club of True Highlanders, the, 283

 Cluny Castle, 229

 Cluny Mac Pherson, 229

 _Cockilby’s Sow_, 155, 161

 Cock of the North, the, 139, 140

 _Cogadh na Sith_, 76, 131, 132, 363

 Coll Kitto, 92, 307, 336

 Coll, the Mac Leans of, 274

 _Complaynt of Scotland_, 18, 35, 48

 Cona, the Glen, 339

 Contin, burning chapel at, 302

 Coomassie, pipers at, 134, 138

 Coventry performance in, 50

 Craigellachie, 108

 Craignish, 324

 Cremona, 258, 264

 Crimea, the, 138, 207

 Cromdale Hill, 128

 _Cruachan a’ Cheathaich_, 350

 _Cruinneachadh nan Camaronach_, 344

 Crusaders’ March, the, 140

 Cuidad Rodrigo, Battle of, 129

 Culloden, Battle of, 56, 58, 113, 229

 Cumberland, Duke of, 113, 114

 _Cumha no Chloinn_, 266

 _Cumha Ruaraidh Mhoir_, 330

 Cunningham, Allan, 99


 Dalkeith, 49, 172

 Dalmarnock, 256

 Dalry (Ayrshire), 226

 Dalziel, Sir John Graham, 36

 _Daorach Robbi_, 91

 Dargai, pipes at, 123, 127, 128

 Davidson, Mr., of Tulloch, 277, 278

 Delhi, a camp at, 217

 Derby, 227

 Desperate Battle of Perth, the, 301

 Dingwall, pipes in, 52, 278

 Disarming Act, the, 58

 Don, the River, 226

 Druids, the, 19, 24, 76, 100

 Drummossie Moor, 229

 Drumouchter, 226

 Dunad, Castle of, 310

 Duart, Mac Leans of, 274

 Dunbar, poet, 154, 158

 Dundee, 172

 Dunderave, Castle of, 193;
   ghostly piper of, 251

 Dunfermline, 13

 Dunivaig, Castle of, 307, 310

 Dun Ronald’s Tune, 126

 Dunstaffnage, Castle of, 310, 357

 Duntroon Castle, 92, 309, 311

 Duntroon’s Salute, 311

 Duntulm Castle, 269

 Dunvegan Castle, 102, 104, 119, 132, 239, 248, 262, 266, 268, 270, 272,
    273, 351, 362

 Dumbarton, 171

 Dumfries, 171, 277

 Durer, Albrecht, 32, 46, 225

 Durcha, the Hill of, 235

 Durinish, 267

 Durham, 190

 Durness, 253


 Edinburgh, 118, 153, 158, 162, 174;
   the Duke of, 164;
   the pipers of, 170;
   competitions in, 270, 355

 Edinburgh Castle, 256

 _Edinburgh Courant_, 118

 Edward II., 38;
   III., 39;
   VI., 47;
   VII., 277

 Eglinton, Earl of, 290

 Elandslaagte, Battle of, 135

 End of the Little Bridge, the, 107

 Ettrick, the River, 127


 _Fair Maid of Perth, The_, 303

 Falkirk, 176, 290;
   pipers from, 133, 138;
   Tryste in, 289

 Falmouth, 117

 _Family Legend, The_, 200

 Farquharson, Rev. John, 14

 Faust, the Story of, 234

 _Fhuair mi pòg o laimh an Righ_, 329

 Fife, Earl of, 280

 Fife, Duke of, 284

 Findlater, Piper, 128, 129

 Finlagan Isle and Loch, 240

 “Fionn,” translations by, 330, 357, 364

 Fisher, Alex, 202

 Flodden, Battle of, 27, 46, 180

 Flowers of the Forest, the, 143, 154, 160

 Follart, Loch, 262

 Forbes, John, piper, 162

 Forbes, Sir Charles, 285

 Fort Rohya, Battle of, 143

 Fort Washington, Battle of, 133

 France, pipes in, 38

 Fraser’s Regiment, 119


 Gairloch lairds and pipers, 165, 272

 Galbraith, Donald, piper, 284

 Galbraith, Robert, piper, 138

 Galloway, a well in, 163

 Gallowgate Barracks, Glasgow, 218

 Gardner, Rev. Mr., 361

 Gesto Book, the, 103, 104, 107

 Gesto, Capt. Mac Leod of, 103, 104

 Gesto Collection of Music, 110

 Gilbert, W. S., 74

 _Gille Calum_, 30, 91, 356

 _Gilliechroist_, 104, 319

 Glasgow Cathedral, 224, 256

 Glasgow, Court House in, 217

 Glasgow Highlanders, the, 294

 Glasgow, old piper in, 321

 Glen, David, pipe-maker, 53, 110

 Glen, J. & R., pipemakers, 41, 104

 Glen, Messrs, 109

 Glencoe, 93

 Glencoe, Massacre of, 338

 Glendaruel, 332

 Glenelg, 258

 Glenesk, 327

 Glenfinnan, Prince Charlie at, 121

 Glenfruin, rout of, 67

 Glengarry, 90

 Glengarry, the piper of, 147

 Glengarry, war tune of, 319

 Glenlivck, Battle of, 116

 Glenluce, 171

 Glenorchy, Sir J. Campbell of, 337

 Glenorchy, the bard of, 26, 199

 Glenquoich, story of, 249

 Good Hope, Cape of, 141

 Gordon Castle, piper at, 135

 Gordon, Capt., of the Seaforths, 121

 Gordon, Duke of, 81

 Gordon, General, 154

 Gordon, Highlanders, the, 128, 131, 132, 135, 137, 141, 216, 220

 Gordon, Lord Louis, 266

 Gourock, 267

 Govan Police Band, 294

 Grant, Clan, Gathering of, 109

 Grant, J. W., of Elchies, 109

 Grants of Glenmoriston, 229

 Grants of Strathspey, 229

 Greek sculpture, 34

 Greenock, 267

 Grim Donald’s sweetheart, 363

 Gunn, John, piper, 163

 Gunn, Wm., piper, 109, 188


 Habbie Simpson, piper of Kilbarchan, 155, 185

 Hal o’ the Wynd, 303

 Hamburg, carvings in, 157

 Hamilton, Wm., Govan, 294

 Hamilton, Wm., of Bangour, 176

 Handel, 77

 Hanover, the House of, 56

 Harlaw, Battle of, 26, 42, 108

 Harris, a story of, 236

 Haughs o’ Cromdale, the, 82, 128, 140

 Hastie, John, piper, 46, 180

 Hastie, Robin, piper, 179

 Hebrides, Dr. Johnson in, 73

 Henderson, Peter, pipe maker, 109

 Henry VII., 44

 Henry VIII., 46

 Heriot, the parish of, 173

 Heritable Jurisdiction Abolition Act, 258

 Hey Johnnie Cope, 122, 128, 132, 139, 140

 _Highland Brigade, The_, 141

 Highland Laddie, the, 140

 Highland Light Infantry, the, 134, 137

 Highland Scottische, the, 213

 Highland Society of London, 53, 72, 130, 270, 278, 281, 282, 288

 Highland Society of Scotland, 270, 288

 _Historical Proofs of the Highlanders_, 54

 _History of the Peninsular War_, 129

 Hogg, James, 99

 Holyrood Palace, 51, 158, 256

 Honeyman, James, piper, 138

 Honeyman, John, piper, 138

 Hope, General, of Pinkie, 143

 Houston, Rev. Andrew, 159

 Hull, carvings at, 44

 Hume, Rev, Alex., 51

 Hundred Pipers, the, 9

 Hunt, Leigh, 193

 Huntly, Marquis of, 283

 Hyder Ali defeated, 120


 _Iain Dall_, 28, 165, 352

 _Iain Lom_, 25

 _Iain Odhar_, 258, 263

 I have had a Kiss of the King’s Hand, 329

 Inveraray, 202, 312

 Inverlochy, Battle of, 25, 42, 76, 321, 347

 Inverness, 20, 153, 160, 281

 Inverurie, battle at, 119, 266

 Iona, 13

 Ireland, 19, 21

 Ireland, the claim of, 54

 _Irish Masque, The_, 170

 _Irish Sketch Book, The_, 196

 _Is fada mar so tha sinn_, 323

 Isles, Donald Lord of the, 20

 Islay, how it lost the music, 242

 Islay, 307

 Islay, Hector Mac Lean of, 240

 Italy, the pibroch not from, 55


 Jacobites, the, 56, 128

 Jamaica Street, Glasgow, player in, 72

 James I., 20, 40, 51, 158;
   IV., 170;
   VI., 21, 49;
   VII., 118

 Jedburgh, 179, 180

 Jenny Dang the Weaver, 361

 _Jew Exile, The_, 198

 Jerome, St., 60

 John Garbh of Raasay’s Lament, 332

 John o’ Groat’s house, 153, 159

 Johnson, Ben, 170

 Johnson, Dr., 73, 262, 274

 Johnstone, John, piper, 171

 Johnstone, Sir Archibald, 195


 Keene, Charles, artist, 206

 Keill, cave at, 250

 Keith, 171

 Kempelen, Baron Von, 88

 Kent, a Mac Crimmon in, 267

 Keppoch, the bard of, 24

 Kessock Ferry, 283

 _Kidnapped_, 293

 Kilbarchan, 155, 184, 195

 Kilellan, the hill of, 250

 Killychrist, 319

 Kinghorn, 173, 175

 King of Pipers, the, 284

 Kintail, a Mac Crimmon in, 264

 Kintail, the Lord of, 265, 266

 Kintyre, a cave in, 250

 Kircaldy, story of, 52

 Kirke, Thomas, 196

 Kirriemuir, 173

 Kitchener, Lord, 135, 154

 Knox, John, a book of, 14

 Kourgave Hill, 42nd at, 128

 Kyleakin, 276


 Lairg, village of, 234

 Lament for the Children, the, 266

 Lament for the Harp Tree, the, 363

 _Lasan Phadruig Chaogaich_, 352

 Lauder, 172

 Leitch, John, 331

 Leith, 191

 Leith Roads, warships in, 118

 Leslie, General, 127

 Lewis, piper from, 135

 Linlithgow, 44, 171

 Lochaber, the Bard of, 25

 Lochaber no More, 93, 153, 207, 216, 327

 Lochaber, pipes in, 153

 Lochiel, Cameron of, 343

 Loch of the Sword, the, 344

 Loch Lomond, 331

 Londonderry invested, 118

 Lothian, Lord, 117

 Lords of Session, playing the, 217

 Lorimer, Robert, piper, 172

 _Lost Pibroch, The_, 227

 Louis XIV. and XV., 38

 Lovat, Lord, 153

 Lucknow, the story of, 121, 128, 133, 138, 313


 Mac Arthur, Archibald, 270

 Mac Arthur, Charles, 290

 Mac Arthur, John and Donald, 27

 Mac Arthur, Professor, 290

 Mac Arthurs, the, 268

 _Mac Cailein Mór_, 326

 Mac Codrum, _Iain_, 26, 199

 Mac Coll, John, 285

 Mac Crimmon, Donald _Bàn_, 315

 Mac Crimmon, John _Dubh_, 277, 280

 Mac Crimmon, Donald _Dubh_, 317

 Mac Crimmons, the, 79, 102, 103, 104, 105, 119, 165, 239, 242, 248,
    249, 258

 Mac Crimmon, Donald _Mòr_, 323, 362

 Mac Crimmon, Patrick, 324, 329, 332

 Mac Crimmon’s Lament, 261, 266, 314

 Mac Culloch, Dr., 80, 196

 Mac Donald, Alex., 14, 24, 284

 Mac Donald, A., of Glengarry, 319

 Mac Donald (Coll Kitto), 310

 Mac Donald, David, 39

 Mac Donald, Donald, 108, 109, 110, 277

 Mac Donald, Dr. K. N., 110

 Mac Donalds, fighting at Contin, 302

 Mac Donald, General Hector, 96

 Mac Donald, Hugh, 256

 Mac Donald, Joseph, 108

 Mac Donalds, march of the, 311

 Mac Donald, Murdoch, 21, 22

 Mac Donald of Clan Ranald, 290

 Mac Donalds of Loch Moidart, 271

 Mac Donald of the Isles, 240, 242, 268, 290

 Mac Donald, Rev. Patrick, 108

 Mac Donald’s Salute, 362

 Mac Donald, Sir Alex., 311

 Mac Donald, William, piper, 164

 Mac Donel, Irish piper, 164

 Mac Donell, Alice C., 131

 Mac Donells of Glengarry, 90, 320

 Mac Donells, of Keppoch, the, 330

 Mac Dougall Gillies, J., piper, 285, 331

 Mac Dougall, of Lorne, 326

 Mac Eachern, Duncan, 284

 Mac Eanric, _Iain Breac_, 347

 Mac Farlane, Andrew, Chief, 330

 Mac Farlane, Malcolm, 306

 Mac Farlane, Provost, Dumbarton, 331

 Mac Gregor, a, 252

 Mac Gregors’ Gathering, the, 340

 Mac Gregor, John, 290, 358

 Mac Gregor, Sir John Murray, 153

 Mac Gregor of Ruaro, 349

 Mac Gregor of Glenstrae, 349

 Mac Gregor pipers, 275

 Mac Gregor, Patrick, 289

 Mac Ians of Glencoe, 93, 339

 Mac Intosh, Alex., 138

 Mac Intosh’s Lament, the, 282, 301, 304

 Mac Intosh, the, 304

 Mac Intyre, Duncan _Bàn_, 26, 199

 Mac Intyres, hereditary pipers, 38, 271

 Mac Ivor, Findlay, piper, 337

 Mac Kay, Angus, 109, 110, 224, 262, 263, 271, 276, 277, 280, 304, 355,
    364

 Mac Kay, Charles, 130

 Mac Kay, Clan Society, 135

 Mac Kay, Donald, 277, 332

 Mac Kay, James, 135

 Mac Kay, John (_Iain Dall_), 352

 Mac Kay, John, 276

 Mac Kays, hereditary pipers, 272

 Mac Kay, Kenneth, 131, 132

 Mac Kay, Rev. Dr. George, 160

 Mac Kenzie, A. C., 280

 Mac Kenzie, Alex., 235, 273, 297, 364

 Mac Kenzie, Captain, 278

 Mac Kenzies, Clan Song of, 342

 Mac Kenzie, Col. K. W. S., 281

 Mac Kenzies, the country of, 302, 319

 Mac Kenzie, John Bane, 103, 106, 277, 278, 280, 284, 285, 291

 Mac Kenzie of Gairloch, 28, 272

 Mac Kenzie, Rev. James, 40, 42, 170

 Mac Kenzie, John, author, 315

 Mac Kenzie, Lady Anne’s Farewell to Rosehaugh, 283

 Mac Kenzie, Mr., of Allangrange, 278

 Mac Kenzie, Ronald, 135, 285

 Mac Kenzie, Mr., of Millbank, 280

 Mac Kenzie, Sir J. J. R., 281

 Mac Kinnon, Robert, piper, 109

 Mac Kinnon, the Clan, 249

 Mac Lachlan, John, piper, 109, 129, 285

 Mac Lachlans’ March, the, 355

 Mac Lean, clan music of, 110

 Mac Lean, Hector, of Islay, 240, 364

 Mac Lean, John Garve of Coll, 21

 _Mac Lean’s History of Celtic Language_, 60

 Mac Lean the Clan, pipers of, 274

 Mac Lellan, piper of H.L.I., 134

 Mac Lennan, Alex., 282, 285

 Mac Lennan, Donald, 280

 Mac Lennans, the, 284

 Mac Lennan, William, 284, 291

 Mac Leod, Captain, of Gesto, 103, 104, 321, 340

 Mac Leod of Dunvegan, 28, 239, 258, 267, 329

 Mac Leod, Dr. Norman, 56

 Mac Leod, Fiona, 288

 Mac Leod, John Garbh of Raasay, 332, 334

 Mac Leod, John, piper, 133

 Mac Leod, Kenneth, piper, 135

 Mac Leod, Norman, Assynt., 341

 Mac Leod of Glenelg, 28

 Mac Leod’s Highlanders, 120

 Mac Leod of Raasay, 276

 Mac Leod, Roderick, of Mac Leod, 329

 Mac Leods, 21, 102, 119

 Mac Leods’ Salute, 362

 Mac Leods, the, of Gesto, 110

 Mac Mhurich, Neil, Clan Ranald bard, 24, 26, 27, 224

 Mac Naughton, Alex., 116

 Mac Neills of Barra, the, 16

 Mac Phedran, Donald, 284

 Mac Phee, Donald, 109, 284, 285

 Mac Pherson, James, 14

 Mac Pherson’s Lament, 353

 Mac Pherson, Malcolm, 284

 Mac Pherson of Cluny, 229, 275, 327

 Mac Pherson, Patrick, 86

 Mac Rae, Angus, 285

 Mac Rae, Duncan, 302

 Mac Rae, Farquhar, 285

 Mac Rae, John, 284

 Mac Raes’ March, the, 301, 302

 Mac Ranald, Allan, of Lundie, 319

 Magersfontein, Battle of, 94, 122, 134, 135

 Maggie Lauder, 179

 Malcolm Canmore, 13, 356

 March of the Cameron Men, 122, 134, 288

 Maryburgh, 277, 281

 Matheson, Pipe-Major, 159

 Mary Queen of Scots, 21

 Mealfourvonie, 320

 Meikle Ferry, 272

 Melbourne, 296

 Melrose Abbey, carvings in, 36

 Menteith, Earl of, 347

 Menzies, Piper Donald, 219

 Menzies, Sir Robert, 271

 Menzies, the Clan, 38, 116, 301

 Methuen, General Lord, 135

 Middleton, Wm., piper, 132

 Miserly, Miserable One’s House, the, 324

 Mochaster, the Campbells of, 275

 _Modern Account of Scotland, A_, 196

 _Moladh Mairi_, 355

 Monkstad, 248

 Montrose, the army of, 127

 _Mor Nighean Alasdair Mhic Ruaraidh_, 306

 Morton, Earl of, 117

 Mozart, 77

 _Much Ado About Nothing_, 49

 Mull, Harper of, 22

 Mull, Island of, 248, 249, 270, 318, 327

 Munlochy, 278

 Munro, Neil, 89

 Munroe, Wm., of Achany, 341

 _Music of the Highland Clans_, 267

 _Musical Memoirs of Scotland_, 36, 163, 267

 Mutiny, the Indian, 125, 138, 141

 My Faithful Fair One, 139


 Napier, historian, 129

 Naples, a musician of, 64

 Napoleon, a story of, 140

 Nativity, Catholic tradition of, 32

 Nero, contorniate of, 33

 Nether Lochaber, 324

 Neukomm, the Chevalier, 85

 Nevis, the River, 248

 Newcastle, Scottish army at, 117

 New College, Oxford, 39

 New Testament in Gaelic, 14

 Nineveh, sculptures in, 32

 Nith, the River, 277

 Noah, the story of, 30

 Northampton, Earl of, 196

 North British Fusiliers, the, 117

 Northern Meeting, the, 282, 284

 North Inch of Perth, battle of, 40

 Northumberland, Duchess of, 189

 Northumberland, the piper of, 189

 Norwich, carvings in, 156

 Novogorod, Archbishop of, 63

 Nubar Pasha and pipes, 220


 Ogilvie, Mrs., poem by, 230

 _Old Mortality_, quotation from, 188

 Olrig, parish of, 242

 Omdurman, battle of, 154

 Osborne, Queen Victoria’s funeral from, 154

 Ossian, 20, 50

 Ossianic poetry, 14, 54, 273


 Paderewski, 82, 97

 _Peblis to the Play_, 41

 Peingowen, the farm of, 269

 Peninsular War, pipers in, 129

 Pennant, references from, 35

 Pentland’s, Satanic dance on, 224

 Periwig Reel, the, 360

 Perth, pipers of, 51, 171

 Perth, competition at, 281

 Perthshire, expedition into, 20

 Peterhead, superstition at, 226

 Pesth, piping at, 64

 Pibroch o’ Donuil Dhu, 321

 Picts, the, 54

 Pictou, a Mac Kay died at, 273

 Pifferari, the Italian, 64

 Philiphaugh, Battle of, 127, 326

 Piper’s Pule, the, 127

 Piper’s Stone, the, 128

 Piper’s Warning, the, 92

 Pinkie, Battle of, 347

 Pondicherry, fighting at, 121

 _Popular Gaelic Songs_, 315

 _Popular Tales of the West Highlands_, 105

 Port Novo, fighting at, 120

 Prestonpans, Battle of, 52, 118, 347

 Priesthood, the Celtic, 19

 Prince Edward Island, 274

 Prince of Wales, the piper to, 164

 Prince’s Salute, the, 105

 Princess of Thule, the, 165

 Procopius, historian, 15, 35

 _Provincial Poets_, 173

 Puebla Heights, pipes at, 128

 _Punch_, a joke from, 205


 Quatre Bras, Battle of, 131, 132, 340

 Quebec, Battle of, 119

 Quhale, the clan, 40, 228

 Quinish, in Mull, 22

 Quintillianus, Aristides, 35


 Ralph, Julian, war correspondent, 93, 96

 Ramsay, Allan, 328

 Ramsay, P. A., 22

 Ranald, the clan, 24, 26, 271

 Rankins, hereditary pipers, 275

 Rannoch, dispute about, 343;
   the Menzies of, 271;
   a school in, 275

 _Raonull Mac Ailean Oig_, 363

 _Raoghull Odhar_, a cowardly piper, 126

 Reay Country, pipers from, 132, 135, 272;
   college in, 273

 _Records of Argyll_, 240

 _Redgauntlet_, story from, 252

 Reel o’ Tulloch, the, 213, 261, 357

 Reformation, the, 42

 Reid, James, piper, 118, 121

 Reid, Jamie, piper, 172

 Retreat, meaning of, 140

 Reveille, meaning of, 139

 Richard II., 40

 Richborough Castle, carvings at, 34

 Richmond and Gordon, Duke of, 125, 285

 Ripon Cathedral, carvings in, 156

 Ritchie, Alexander A., poet, 166

 Ritchie, James, piper, 176

 Robertson, Hugh, pipe-maker, 52

 Rob Roy, 12, 153, 261

 Rob Roy’s Lament, 355

 Rogart, the parish of, 342

 Romans, the, 15;
   pipes among, 34

 Rome, Italian shepherds in, 157

 Rory _Mòr’s_ Lament, 330

 Rosehall, estate of, 235

 Ross, a Breadalbane piper, 165

 Ross, Duncan, 103, 107

 Rosslyn Chapel, carvings in, 44, 156, 226

 Ross, William, piper, 103, 154, 284

 Ross-shire Buffs, the, 129

 Rout of Moy, the, 266, 315

 Royal Highlanders, 125, 133, 134, 137, 138, 154, 160, 220

 Royal Scots Fusiliers, the, 117, 137

 Royal Scots, the, 137, 159

 Rutherglen, tradition of, 256

 _Rutherglen and Cathkin_, 256

 _Ruaraidh Dall_, 21, 28


 Sarasate, 97

 Scale of the pipes, peculiarities of, 77, 89

 _Scottish Gael_, Logan’s, 267

 _Scottish Life and Character_, 221

 Scott, Sir Walter, 39, 147, 178, 180, 188, 287, 288, 297, 317, 321, 331

 Scots Guards, the, 137

 Scripture, pipes in, 31

 Seaforth, Colonel Mac Kenzie of, 281, 282

 Seaforth Highlanders, 121, 137, 135

 Seaforth, Lord, 285

 Sheriffmuir, Battle of, 42, 324, 347

 Sheriffmuir March, the, 346

 Sharpe, Archbishop, 163, 195

 Shakespeare, 48, 49, 53, 196

 Shirt Battle, the, 363

 Shon Mac Lean, Weddin’ of, 150

 Sister’s Lament for her Brothers, The, 363

 Sinclair, George, Earl of Caithness, 337

 Sinclair, George, of Kiess, 337

 Sinclair, Sir John, 338

 Skye, stories of, 90, 233, 239, 214, 248, 319, 327

 Skye, pipers from, 132, 138

 Skye, funeral in, 153

 Skye, making roads in, 155

 Skye, college in, 165, 262

 Skye, island of, 267

 Smith, Sydney, 193

 Snizort, Loch, 248

 Somerled’s Lament, 76

 South African War, pipes in, 93

 Spenser, 48

 Staffa, 271

 St. Andrews, pipers of, 48, 162

 Stewart, Donald, of Invernayle, 347

 Stewart, James, piper, 134

 Stewart, The March of Clan, 346

 Stewart, W., Stirling, 50

 Stevenson, R. L., 288, 293

 Stirling, a complaint from, 162

 Stirling, court case at, 50

 St. Giles, honouring, 48

 St. James’s Palace, pipes in, 42

 St. Patrick, 19

 Strathglass, the village of, 198

 Strath-Conan, 280

 Strathpeffer, 278

 Strathspey, tradition of, 358

 Stuart, Royal House of, 346

 _Suarachan_, story of, 303

 Sutherland, Duke of, 71

 Sutherland, Earl of, 341

 Sutherlandshire, Mac Kays from, 272

 Sutherlandshire, stories of, 234, 253

 Sutherland, William, piper, 285

 Sutherland Rifle Volunteers, 294

 Sydney, New South Wales, 296

 Sydney Scottish Volunteers, 296

 Syme, Geordie, piper, 172

 Sysa, the Well of, 242


 _Tales of the West Highlands_, 238

 Tam o’ Shanter, 201, 223

 Tannahill, poet, 22, 99

 Tarsus, excavations in, 32

 Tattoo, meaning of, 139

 Temple, services of the, 32

 Thackeray, 196

 Theocritus, 32

 _Thogail nam bo_, 331

 Thomason, Major-General, 109, 110, 111

 _Tigh Bhroinein_, 325

 Tobermory, a native of, 212

 Tomnahurich, 238

 Tongue, competition in, 209

 Tongue, college at, 132

 Tongue, pipers from, 131, 132

 Too Long in this Condition, 323

 Trotternish, 332

 Tullich, Aberdeenshire, 357

 Tulloch, Strathspey, 358

 Tullochgorum, 73

 Tweed, the River, 176

 Tyrol, pibroch from the, 55


 _Uamh an Oir_, 248

 Uist, North, 26

 Ulva, the Island of, 270

 Up an’ Waur them a’, Willie, 139

 Up in the Morning’s no for me, 139

 Ure, Duncan, piper, 162


 Victoria, Queen, 133, 154, 277, 279, 280, 281

 Vimiera, Battle of, 129

 Vittoria, Battle of, 128, 129


 Wales, harpers of, 21

 Wallace, William, piper, 163

 Wandering Willie’s Tale, 252

 War or Peace, 76, 131, 132, 363

 Waterloo, pipers at, 128, 131, 143

 Water of Leith, pipers of, 49, 162

 Watsone, Richard, piper, 162

 Wauchope, General, 94

 We Return no More, 261

 Whittier, quotation from, 146

 _Whistlebinkie_, 166, 202

 Whistle ower the lave o’t, 224

 Whyte, Henry, 330, 357, 364

 Wick, the Water of, 337

 Winchester School, arms of, 39

 Wigton, 171

 Windsor, presentation at, 133

 Windsor, Queen’s Funeral at, 154

 Wives of this Glen, 335, 338

 Women of this Glen, 93

 Woo’d an’ Married an’ a’, 141

 Woodward, Richard, piper, 47

 Worcester, Battle of, 324

 Wotherspoon, James, piper, 133, 138


 Yarmouth, carvings at, 44

 Yha, the clan, 228

 York Minster, pipes in, 159

[Illustration: FINIS]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected obvious typographical errors and variations in
      spelling.
 2. Retained archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HIGHLAND BAGPIPE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
